Project Gutenberg's The Little Review, March 1914 (Vol. 1, No. 1), by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll
have to check the laws of the country where you are located before using
this ebook.



Title: The Little Review, March 1914 (Vol. 1, No. 1)

Author: Various

Editor: Margaret C. Anderson

Release Date: October 1, 2019 [EBook #60402]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LITTLE REVIEW, MARCH ***




Produced by Jens Sadowski and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net. This book was
produced from images made available by the Modernist Journal
Project, Brown and Tulsa Universities,
http://www.modjourn.org.









                           THE LITTLE REVIEW


                       Literature Drama Music Art

                          MARGARET C. ANDERSON
                                 EDITOR

                              MARCH, 1914

   A Letter                                       John Galsworthy   3
   Five Japanese Prints                      Arthur Davison Ficke   3
   "The Dark Flower" and the "Moralists"     Margaret C. Anderson   5
   A Remarkable Nietzschean Drama                  DeWitt C. Wing   8
   The Lost Joy                                        Floyd Dell  10
   Paderewski and the New Gods                         The Editor  11
   The Major Symphony                                George Soule  13
   The Prophet of a New Culture              George Burman Foster  14
   How a Little Girl Danced               Nicholas Vachel Lindsay  18
   The New Note                                 Sherwood Anderson  23
   Rahel Varnhagen: Feminist                       Margery Currey  25
   Tagore as a Dynamic                               George Soule  32
   The Meaning of Bergsonism                      Llewellyn Jones  38
   Rupert Brooke's Poetry                                          29
   Ethel Sidgwick's "Succession"                                   34
   Letters of William Vaughn Moody                                 24
   Emerson's Journals                                              42
   The Critics' Critic                                             20
   New York Letter                                                 43


                           THE LITTLE REVIEW
                           Fine Arts Building
                                CHICAGO

                           Volume 1 Number 1

                Copyright, 1914, by Margaret C. Anderson

                      25 cents a copy $2.50 a year




                           THE LITTLE REVIEW


                              MARCH, 1914




                              Announcement


    "The realm of art is prodigious; next to life itself the vastest
                      realm of man's experience."

Appreciation has its outlet in art; and art (to complete the circle and
the figure) has its source in--owes its whole current--to appreciation.
That is, the tides of art would cease to ebb and flow were it not for
the sun and moon of appreciation.

This function of the sun and moon is known as criticism. But criticism
as an art has not flourished in this country. We live too swiftly to
have time to be appreciative; and criticism, after all, has only one
synonym: appreciation. In a world whose high splendor is our chief
preoccupation the quality of our appreciation is the important thing.

Life is a glorious performance: quite apart from its setting, in spite
of the kind of "part" one gets, everybody is given at least his chance
to act. We may do our simple best with the roles we receive; we may
change our "lines" if we're inventive enough to think of something
better; we may alter our "business" to get our personalities across more
effectively; or we may boldly accost the stage manager, hand back the
part he'd cast us for, and prove our right to be starred. The player who
merely holds madame's cloak may do it with dignity and grace; and he who
changes his role, with a fine freedom and courage, discovers that he's
not acting but living his part! For this reason we feel that we needn't
be accused of an unthinking "all's-right-with-the-world" attitude when
we assert that life is glorious.

And close to Life--so close, from our point of view, that it keeps
treading on Life's heels--is this eager, panting Art who shows us the
wonder of the way as we rush along. We may as well acknowledge right
here that we've never had a friend (except in one or two rare instances)
who hasn't shaken his head at us paternally about this attitude toward
art. "It's purely transitional," he says, tolerantly; "life is so much
more interesting, you see, that you're bound to substitute people for
art, eventually. It really doesn't matter so much that Alice Meynell
wrote 'Renouncement' as that Mrs. Jones next door has left her husband."
Well, he's wrong; at least, he can't speak for us. Wells said to save
the kitten and let the Mona Lisa burn; who would consider anything else?
We think it's rather silly in our paternal friend to argue with us so
heatedly--beside the point! It's not a question as to which is more
important--"Renouncement" or Mrs. Jones. We're merely trying to say that
we're intensely interested in Mrs. Jones, but that Mrs. Meynell has made
our lives more wonderful--permanently.

THE LITTLE REVIEW means to reflect this attitude toward life and art.
Its ambitious aim is to produce criticism of books, music, art, drama,
and life that shall be fresh and constructive, and intelligent from the
artist's point of view. For the instinct of the artist to distrust
criticism is as well founded as the mother's toward the sterile woman.
More so, perhaps; for all women have some sort of instinct for
motherhood, and all critics haven't an instinct for art. Criticism that
is creative--that is our high goal. And criticism is never a merely
interpretative function; it _is_ creation: it gives birth! It's not
necessary to cite the time-worn illustration of Da Vinci and Pater to
prove it.

Books register the ideas of an age; this is perhaps their chief claim to
immortality. But much that passes for criticism ignores this aspect of
the case and deals merely with a question of literary values. To be
really interpretative--let alone creative--criticism must be a blend of
philosophy and poetry. We shall try very hard to achieve this difficult
combination.

Also, we mean to print articles, poems, stories that seem to us
definitely interesting, or--to use a much-abused adjective--vital. Our
point of view shall not be restrictive; we may present the several
judgments of our various enthusiastic contributors on one subject in the
same issue. The net effect we hope will be stimulating and what we like
to call releasing.

Feminism? A clear-thinking magazine can have only one attitude; the
degree of ours is ardent!

Finally, since THE LITTLE REVIEW, which is neither directly nor
indirectly connected in any way with any organization, society, company,
cult or movement, is the personal enterprise of the editor, it shall
enjoy that untrammelled liberty which is the life of Art.

And now that we've made our formal bow we may say confidentially that we
take a certain joyous pride in confessing our youth, our perfectly
inexpressible enthusiasm, and our courage in the face of a serious
undertaking; for those qualities mean freshness, reverence, and victory!
At least we have got to the age when we realize that all beautiful
things make a place for themselves sooner or later in the world. And we
_hope_ to be very beautiful!

If you've ever read poetry with a feeling that it was your religion,
your very life; if you've ever come suddenly upon the whiteness of a
Venus in a dim, deep room; if you've ever felt music replacing your
shabby soul with a new one of shining gold; if, in the early morning,
you've watched a bird with great white wings fly from the edge of the
sea straight up into the rose-colored sun--if these things have happened
to you and continue to happen till you're left quite speechless with the
wonder of it all, then you'll understand our hope to bring them nearer
to the common experience of the people who read us.

   The more I see of academicism, the more I distrust it. If I had
   approached painting as I have approached book-writing and music,
   that is to say, by beginning at once to do what I wanted ... I
   should have been all right.--_The Note-Books of Samuel Butler._

   Poetry is in Nature just as much as carbon is.--Emerson's
   _Journals_ (1856-1863).

   Life is like music; it must be composed by ear, feeling and
   instinct, not by rule.--_The Note-Books of Samuel Butler._




                        A Letter from Galsworthy


               Written from Taormina, February 23, 1914.

MY DEAR MADAM:

You ask me to bid your magazine good speed; and so far as I have any
right, I do indeed. It seems you are setting out to watch the street of
Life from a high balcony, where at all events the air should be fresh
and sunrise sometimes visible. I hope you will decide to sleep out there
under the stars, for what kills most literary effort is the hothouse air
of temples, clubs, and coteries, that, never changed, breeds in us by
turn febrility and torpor. Enthusiasms are more convincing from those
who have not told their loves too often. And criticism more poignant
from one who has been up at dawn, seen for himself and put down his
impression before he goes on 'Change. There is a saying of de Maupassant
about a writer sitting down before an object until he has seen it in the
way that he alone can see it, seen it with the part of him which makes
him This man and not That. For the creative artist and the creative
critic there is no rule, I think, so golden. And I did seem to notice in
America that there was a good deal of space and not much time; and that
without too much danger of becoming "Yogis" people might perhaps sit
down a little longer in front of things than they seemed to do. But I
noticed too a great energy and hope. These will be your servants to
carry through what will not, surely, be just an exploit or adventure,
but a true and long comradeship with effort that is worth befriending.

So all good fortune!

                                                Very faithfully yours,
                                                      JOHN GALSWORTHY.




                          Five Japanese Prints


                          ARTHUR DAVISON FICKE


                           I KIYONOBU SPEAKS

       The actor on his little stage
   Struts with a mimic rage.--
   Across my page
   My passion in his form shall tower from age to age.

       What he so crudely dreams
   In vague and fitful gleams,
   The crowd esteems.--
   Well! let the future judge, if his or mine this seems--

       This calm Titanic mould
   Stalking in colours bold
   Fold upon fold--
   This lord of dark, this dream I dreamed of old!


                     II FIGURE BY OKUMURA MASANOBU

       Garbed in flowing folds of light,
   Azure, emerald, rose, and white,
   Watchest thou across the night.

       Crowned with splendor is thine head:
   All the princes great and dead
   Round thy limbs their state have shed--

       Calm, immutable to stand--
   Gracious head and poised hand--
   O'er the years that flow like sand.


                     III PILLAR-PRINT BY KIYOMITSU

       A place for giant heads to take their rest
   Seems her pale breast.

       Her sweeping robe trails like the cloud and wind
   Storms leave behind.

       The ice of the year, and its Aprilian part,
   Sleep in her heart.

       Wherefore, small marvel that her footsteps be
   Like strides of Destiny!


                      IV PILLAR-PRINT BY TOYONOBU

       O lady of the long robes, the slow folds flowing--
   Lady of the white breast, the dark and lofty head--
   Dwells there any wonder, the way that thou art going--
       Or goest thou toward the dead?

       So calm thy solemn steps, so slow the long lines sweeping
   Of garments pale and ghostly, of limbs as grave as sleep--
   I know not if thou, spectre, hast love or death in keeping,
       Or goest toward which deep.

       Thou layest thy robes aside with gesture large and flowing--
   Is it for love or sleep--is it for life or death?
   I would my feet might follow the path that thou art going,
       And thy breath be my breath.


                       V PILLAR-PRINT BY HARUNOBU

       From an infinite distance, the ghostly music!
   Few and slender the tones, of delicate silver,
   As stars are broidered on the veil of evening....

       He passes by, the flute and the dreaming player--
   Slow are his steps, his eyes are gravely downcast;
   His pale robes sway in long folds with his passing.

       Out of the infinite distance, a ghostly music
   Returns--in slender tones of delicate silver,
   As stars are broidered on the veil of evening.




                 "The Dark Flower" and the "Moralists"


                          MARGARET C. ANDERSON

   _The Dark Flower_, by John Galsworthy. (Charles Scribner's Sons, New
                                 York.)

A book that has beauty as it's given to few books to achieve it has been
the innocent cause of more ignorant, naive, and stupid condemnation than
anything published for a long time. Even the English critics--who
usually avoid these shallows--in several cases hit the rocks with awful
force. And all because a man with the soul of the old gods chose to
tell, quite simply and with inexpressible beauty, the truth about an
artist. _The Dark Flower_ was everybody's opportunity to deepen his
vision, but nearly everybody decided to look upon it as an emotional
redundancy. Perhaps this doesn't do some of them justice: I believe a
good many of them considered it positively dangerous!

My quite spontaneous tribute to Galsworthy's Mark Lennan--before I'd
heard anyone discuss him--was that here was a man a woman would be glad
to trust her soul to. And, in view of how silly it is for a woman to
trust her soul to anyone but herself, I still insisted that one could do
it with Mark Lennan: because he'd not take charge of anyone's soul!--his
wife's least of all. Of course, to love a man of his sort would mean
unhappiness; but women who face life with any show of bravery face
unhappiness as part of the day's work. It remains to decide whether one
will reach high and break a bone or two over something worth having, or
play safe and take a pale joy in one's unscarred condition. With Mark
Lennan a woman would have had--a la Browning--her perfect moment; and
such things are rare enough to pay well for, if necessary.

All of which is making a very personal issue of _The Dark Flower_; but
it's the kind of book you've got to be personal about; you revise your
list of friends on a basis of their attitude toward Galsworthy.

After I'd finished _The Dark Flower_--and it had never occurred to my
naive mind that anyone would disagree with me about it--various persons
began to tell me how wrong I was. Mark Lennan was a cad and a
weakling--decidedly the kind of person to be kept out of a good novel.
The very beauty of the book made it insidious, someone said; such art
expended in defense of immorality would soon tend to confuse our
standards. Someone else remarked patronizingly: "Oh, _The Dark Flower_
may be well done and all that, but personally I've always had a passion
for the normal!" But, most maddening of all, I think, were those readers
of thrillers, of sweet, sentimental stories--those persons who patronize
comic opera exclusively because they "see enough tragedy in life to
avoid it in the theater"--who asked earnestly: "But, after all, what's
the use of such books? What possible _good do they do_?"

On another page of this review such questions are answered with a
poignancy I dare not compete with. I want to try, instead, to tell why
_The Dark Flower_ seems to me an altogether extraordinary piece of work.

In the first place, constructively. The story covers three episodes of a
man's love life: Spring, with its awakening; Summer, with its deep
passion; and Autumn, with its desperate longing for another Spring. But
the handling of the episodes is so unepisodic that you feel you've been
given the man's whole life, day by day, from Oxford to that final going
down the years--_sans_ youth, _sans_ spring, _sans_ beauty, _sans_
passion; _sans_ everything save that "faint, glimmering light--far out
there beyond...." This effect of completeness is achieved, I think, by
the remarkable intensity of the writing, by the clever (and by no means
easy) method of sometimes allowing the characters the author's
prerogative of addressing the audience directly. Highly subjective in
everything that he does, Galsworthy has reached a climax of subjectivity
here: _The Dark Flower_ is as personal in its medium as music.

In the second place--the great matter of style. Every page shows the
very poetry of prose writing; there's an inevitability about its choice
of beautiful and simple words that makes them seem a part of the nature
they describe. For instance, to choose at random from a multitude of
exquisite things: "... under the stars of this warm Southern night,
burning its incense of trees and flowers"; or, "And he sat for a long
time that evening under a large lime-tree on a knoll above the
Serpentine. There was very little breeze, just enough to keep alive a
kind of whispering. What if men and women, when they had lived their
gusty lives, became trees! What if someone who had burned and ached were
now spreading over him this leafy peace--this blue-black shadow against
the stars? Or were the stars, perhaps, the souls of men and women
escaped for ever from love and longing? ... If only for a moment he
could desert his own heart, and rest with the trees and stars!" With a
single clause like "for ever part of the stillness and the passion of a
summer night" Galsworthy gets effects that some poets need three or four
verses for. In one place he defines for all time a Chopin mazurka as "a
little dancing dirge of summer"; in another gives you with one stroke an
impression of his hero that it's impossible to forget: "He looks as if
he were seeing sands and lions."

In the third place, Galsworthy's psychology is profound--impregnable.
One simple characterization will serve to illustrate: he describes a
man's face as having the candour of one at heart a child--"that simple
candour of those who have never known how to seek adventures of the
mind, and have always sought adventures of the body."

As to the lesson of _The Dark Flower_--its philosophy, its "moral"--I
can only say that it hasn't any such thing; that is, while it's full to
the brim of philosophy, it doesn't attempt to force a philosophy upon
you. It offers you the truth about a human being and lets it go at
that--which seems to be the manner of not a few who have written
greatly. For the other sort of thing, go to any second-rate novelist you
happen to admire; he'll give you characters who have a hard time of it
and tell you just where they're right and where they're wrong. I can see
how you feel you're getting more for your money.

I can't help feeling that everything Galsworthy has done has had its
special function in making _The Dark Flower_ possible. The sociology of
_Fraternity_, the passionate pleading of _Justice_ and _Strife_, the
incomparable emotional experiments of _A Commentary_, the
intellectuality of _The Patrician_--all these have contributed to the
noble simplicities and the noble beauty of _The Dark Flower_.




                               The Garden


      My heart shall be thy garden. Come, my own,
          Into thy garden; thine be happy hours
            Among my fairest thoughts, my tallest flowers,
      From root to crowning petal thine alone.

      Thine is the place from where the seeds are sown
          Up to the sky enclosed, with all its showers.
            But ah, the birds, the birds! Who shall build bowers
      To keep these thine? O friend, the birds have flown.

      For as these come and go, and quit our pine
          To follow the sweet season, or, new-comers,
            Sing one song only from our alder-trees,

      My heart has thoughts, which, though thine eyes hold mine,
          Flit to the silent world and other summers,
            With wings that dip beyond the silver seas.

              --_Alice Meynell's Poems._ (Charles Scribner's Sons.)




                     A Remarkable Nietzschean Drama


                             DEWITT C. WING

     _Mr. Faust_, by Arthur Davison Ficke. (Mitchell Kennerley, New
                                 York.)

    Have you thought there could be but a single Supreme? There can
                  be any number of Supremes.--Whitman.

Mr. Faust is the embodiment of the Nietzschean attitude toward the
universe. This characterization consciously ignores the legendary Faust
of Goethe as having no vital kinship with his namesake. There is of
course a skeletal likeness one to the other, but the hero in Mr. Ficke's
drama is incarnated with modern flesh and endued with a supreme will.
His unconquerable spirit is not that of Goethe's _Faust_ but of
Friedrich Nietzsche. Incidentally and singularly it is the spirit of
Whitman. And these two men, more than any other two or twenty in the
realm of literature, represent the undying god Pan, or the spirit of
Youth. Nietzsche and Whitman are the understanding comrades of the
young-hearted and open-minded.

_Mr. Faust's_ creator may have no conscious knowledge of Whitman's
poetry, which is a matter of no moment, but he has read Nietzsche, and
that is momentous--indispensable--in relation to this splendid result of
white-heat intellection. I say intellection because _Mr. Faust_ is not
so much a work of art as a remarkable example of reproduction. I know
that, although the thought and feeling of the work rise in places to the
power of an inspiration wholly personal to the author, never "Thus Spake
Zarathustra." For that is an original, authentic voice which, like
everything else in nature, has no substitute or duplicate.

I can fancy a strong, healthy, organically cultured young man, just
beginning to feel his way into the realities that lie outside the
American cornbelt, by chance taking a peep into one of Nietzsche's great
books, and, fascinated and quickened by that marvelously contagious god,
leaping to new heights of his own manhood. I should guess that in this
instance the young man, who happens to be a lawyer, thirty-one years
old, living at Davenport, Ia., was temporarily Christianized by bad
luck, illness or something of the sort, and in this extremity, kicked by
Nietzsche, experienced the feeling of personal adequacy to which Mr.
Faust gives utterance. Recovering himself, he avowed his own godhood,
even to the last ditch! And that is the triumphant Youth--the
Nietzsche--of the thing.

A day or two subsequent to the appearance of Mr. Ficke's book upon the
market I had the pleasure of hearing it read, with well-nigh perfect
sympathy and appreciation, by the foremost Nietzschean expositor in this
country. Like other listeners I was amazed, charmed and aroused. Were
these results referable to the play alone or in part to the reader, or
to both? To what extent, I was compelled to ask, was the effect illusory
or hypnotic? I had read some of Ficke's verse, which had given no
intimation of anything in its author so heroically Nietzschean as _Mr.
Faust_. I had consequently tabbed Ficke as probably a poetic
possibility, provided he lived a dozen years in an involuntary hell,
undergoing a new birth. Entertaining the doubts indicated by my
questions, I read _Mr. Faust_ to myself, trying it in my fashion by the
trees, the stars and the lake. Subjected to this test the play did not
have the ring and lift which I had heard and felt when it was
read--perhaps I should say given an added vitality--by a Nietzschean
philosopher. It now impressed me as an extraordinary _tour de force_,
reaching in some of its passages a species of accidental
trans-Nietzscheanism.

Written in blank verse, the superior quality of which is admirably
sustained, the style of the drama is undeniably poetical, as Edwin
Bjoerkman, the editor of Mr. Kennerley's Modern Drama Series, states in
an interesting biographical sketch; but where there is so much
consciousness of workmanship--so much preoccupation with an imported
idea instead of sweeping control by an inner, personal urge like that,
for example, which produced _Thus Spake Zarathustra_--poetry is not to
be expected. What surprises me is that, despite this restriction, Mr.
Ficke strides upward in many lines to the borderland of the gods. In the
first three acts he writes as one possessed--as an intellectualist
furiously interested in Americanizing, if you please, the racial
implications of the philosophy of a superhumanity which will always be
associated with the name of his temporary master, Nietzsche. In these
acts there is a deal of amazing revealment of insight; of aspiration for
transcendent goals; of the spiritual insatiability of man. And there is
a cold humor. Underneath the whole thing lies its own by-product: social
dynamite!

I think that Mr. Ficke finished his play in three acts, but he added two
more--to make it five, I was about to say, but in the fifth he achieves
a measurable justification, for the last sentence, "Touch me across the
dusk," is poetry--the wonderful words of the dying Faust, addressed to
Midge, the only person who understood him.

Near the middle of the opening act, Faust, roused by an inquiring mind
to an analytical protest against things as they are, says,

      ... I would go
      Out to some golden sun-lighted land
      Of silence.

That is poetical; it is cosmic in its feeling. Looking at a bust of
Washington, he enviously--no, compassionately--remarks,

      ... Not a star
      In all the vaults of heaven could trouble you
      With whisperings of more transcendent goals.

At this juncture Satan appears, gains recognition by recalling an
incident involving Faust with a blackmailing woman in a college during
his youth, and thereafter tempts him into empty, unsatisfying paradises.
In his wandering and winding pilgrimage through the world Faust makes
the footprints that we recognize as those of our own humanity, seeking
its way--somewhither. He is offered but rejects peace, happiness,
salvation and all the rest of their related consolations, knowing that
none of them could satisfy his restless heart. To his uncomprehending
friends he is lost, and Satan himself, to whom in such circumstances he
is obviously resigned by society, fails to claim him. But Midge, the
heroine, knew him; she could touch him across the dusk, which was his
kind of immortality. And so Faust, with a vague consciousness of his own
godhood, a sense of his own supremacy, an unshakable faith in one
thing--himself--passed from the earthly freedom of his will into the
great release.

It is altogether too early in the morning of humanity to expect to see
this play or one like it on the stage. That it should be written by a
young American and published by a young Englishman is enough to satisfy
those who would enjoy its presentation, and those to whom it would be
Greek or "unpleasant," whether they saw it or read it, must wait for its
truth through their children--across the dusk!




                              The Lost Joy


                               FLOYD DELL

There was once a lady (I forget her name) who said that love was for
women one of the most important things in the world. She made the remark
and let it go at that. She did not write a book about it. If she had
considered it necessary she would doubtless have written such a book.

Consider the possibility--a book entitled _Woman and Love_, a book
proving with logic and eloquence that woman ought to love, and that,
unless she loved, the highest self-development was impossible to her and
to the race!

It is not entirely absurd. Such a book might have been necessary. If
half of all womankind, through some change in our social and ethical
arrangements, refrained from love as something at once disagreeable and
ungenteel, and if the other half loved under conditions disastrous to
health and spirit, then there might have been need for a book preaching
to women the gospel of love. It would have been time to urge that,
hateful as the conditions might be, love was for women, nevertheless, a
good thing, a fine thing, a wonderful and necessary thing. It would have
been time to break down the prejudice which made one-half of womankind
lead incomplete and futile lives, and to raise love itself to its proper
dignity.

Well, we are in a condition like that today, only it is not love, it is
work that has lost its dignity in the lives of women. It is not love, it
is work from which one-half of womankind refrains as from something at
once disagreeable and ungenteel, while the other half of womankind
performs it under conditions disastrous to health and spirit.

There is need today for a book preaching to women the gospel of work. It
is time to break down the prejudice which makes one-half of womankind
lead incomplete and futile, because idle, lives. We need a book to show
women what work should mean to them.

And, curiously enough, the book exists. It is Olive Schreiner's _Woman
and Labor_. It is a wise book and a beautiful book. There are statistics
in it, but there is eloquence flaming on every page. It is a book of the
joy and the significance of work for women.

When Olive Schreiner says "work," she means it. She does not refer to
the makeshifts which masquerade under the term of "social usefulness."
She means work done with the hands and the brain, work done for money,
work that sets the individual free from dependence on any other
individual. It is a theme worth all her eloquence. For work and love,
and not either of them alone, are the most important things in the
world--the supremest expressions of individual life.




                         H. G. Wells on America


   I came to America balancing between hope and skepticism. The
   European world is full of the criticism of America; and, for the
   matter of that, America, too, is full of it; hostility and
   depreciation prevail--overmuch; for, in spite of rawness and
   vehemence and a scum of blatant, oh! quite asinine, folly, the
   United States of America remains the greatest country in the
   world and the living hope of mankind. It is the supreme break
   with the old tradition; it is the freshest and most valiant
   beginning that has ever been made in human life.--_The Passionate
   Friends._




                      Paderewski and the New Gods


                          MARGARET C. ANDERSON

I shall keep always, as my most unforgettable memory, the thought of a
certain afternoon during Paderewski's tour this year when he walked
quietly back across the stage, in response to an encore, and played
Schumann's _Warum_. It was somehow heart-breaking. It was a more
poignant questioning to me, than Arnold's

      "unquenched, deep-sunken, old-world pain--
      Say, will it never heal?"

Nothing that I have ever heard or seen has given me so vivid a sense of
being in the presence of an art that is immortal.

It seems to have become hideously "popular" to love Paderewski. The
critics will tell you that it's only done in America; that Europeans
have any number of idols they put before him; and that we who persist in
calling him "the greatest" are simply under the spell of an old
hypnotism. There was a time, they'll concede, when he came like a
conqueror, royally deserving the flowers we strewed. But now--there's
Bauer, there's Godowsky, and Hofman, and Gans, and Busoni! One local
critic has even gone to the length of saying that since the American
public has sat at the feet of these men and learned sanity in piano
playing it has no enthusiasm for Paderewski's "neurotic, disordered,
incoherent" music--"his woeful exaggerations of sentiment and hysterical
rhapsody." I should say some unpublishable things to that critic if we
should ever discuss the subject.

The three most interesting human faces I know are Forbes-Robertson's,
Kreisler's, and Paderewski's. In the English actor's there is a meeting
of strength and spirituality (not the anaemic "spirituality" of certain
new cults, but a quality of soul that makes him "a prince, a
philosopher, a lover, a soldier, a sad humorist," all in the limits of
one personality) that means utter nobility. It can be as cold as a
graven image, or as hot with feeling as a poet's. Depth upon depth of
subtlety plays across it--not the hypnotic subtlety of the Orientalist,
but the austere subtlety of an English scholar and a great gentleman. In
Kreisler's there is a meeting of strength and sensuousness that means
utter fascination to the artist who would paint him--utter revealment to
the musician who would analyze his art. For the secret of Kreisler's
personality and his music lies in that finely balanced combination of
qualities: a sensuousness that would be a little overpowering, a little
drugging, without the gigantic strength that seems to hold it in leash.
That balance makes possible his little air of military jauntiness, of
sad Vienna gayety; it gives him that huge effect of power that always
makes me feel I'm watching the king of the forest stride through his
kingdom. You need never expect emotionalism from this musician; he's too
strong to give you anything but passion. In Paderewski's face there is a
meeting of strength and two other predominant qualities: sentience, I
think, and suffering. It's difficult to express his great, interesting
head in a series of nouns; but there are some that come near to it:
mystery, melancholy, weariness, a sort of shattering sorrow; always the
sense of struggle and pain, and always the final releasement--in music.
For while you can conceive a Forbes-Robertson away from the stage, and a
Kreisler apart from his violin, you can never for a moment think of
Paderewski without his piano. Not that he's less of a man, but that he's
the most sensitized human instrument that ever dedicated itself to an
art.

To resort to the most overworked phrase in the language, Paderewski has
a temperament. Somebody has said that no fat person ever possessed one;
and after you've speculated about this till you begin to wonder what
temperament really is, you can come back to Paderewski as the most
adequate illustration. Ysaye is the best example I know of the opposite.
When strength turns to fat ... well, we'll not go into that; but to make
my point--and there's certainly nothing of personal maliciousness in
it--it's necessary to reflect that obesity has some insidious influence
upon artistic utterance. (Schumann-Heink is an artist in the best
meaning of the word; but no one ever talked of her and temperament in
the same breath, so she doesn't negate the issue.) But Ysaye's tepid,
wingless, uninspired music--his utterly sweet but _fat_ music--that
appears to attract thousands of people, is as lazily inadequate as its
creator would be in a marathon. It's as though his vision had dropped
slowly away with every added pound of avoirdupois. Or perhaps it's
because vision has a fashion of dropping away with age....

Ah!--but Paderewski has the years, too, now, and his playing is
as virile, as flaming, as it ever was. An artist--with a
temperament--doesn't get old, any more than Peter Pan does. Paderewski's
furrowed face shows the artist's eternal striving; his music shows his
eternal youth, his faithfulness to the vision that furnishes his answer
to the eternal "Warum?"

This is the secret of Paderewski's white magic. He's still the supreme
god! Bauer plays perfectly within the rules--exquisitely and
powerfully--and misses the top height by the mere fraction of a mood,
the simple lack of a temperament; or, as O. Henry might have explained
it, by the unfortunate encumbrance of a forty-two-inch belt. Hofman has
an impatience with his medium, apparently, that leaves his hearer
unsatisfied with the piano; while Paderewski, though he transcends the
instrument, does so because of his love for the piano as a medium, and
forces his hearer to agree with him that it's the supreme one. Godowsky
forces things into the piano--pushes them in and makes them stay there;
Paderewski draws things out, always, and fills the world with them.

I can think of no comparison from which he doesn't emerge unscathed. If
I were a musical reactionary, this judgment would have no value here;
but I'm not. Classical perfection is no longer interesting; Beethoven
seems no longer to comprehend all music--in fact, the people who have no
rebellions about the sterility of the old symphonies are quite beyond my
range of understanding. But Paderewski plays the old music in a new way,
gives it such vitality of meaning that you feel it's just been born--or,
better, perhaps, that its composers have been triumphantly revalued,
rejustified in their claim for eternal life. His Beethoven is as full of
color as his Chopin; and who, by the way, ever started the popular
nonsense about De Pachmann or anyone else being the supreme Chopin
exponent? No one has ever played Chopin like Paderewski; no one has ever
made such simple, haunting melodies of the nocturnes; no one has ever
struck such ringing Polish music out of the polonaises, or such
wind-swept cadences from the Berceuse; no one has ever played the
Funeral March so like a cosmic procession--the mighty moving of humanity
from birth to death and new life; no one has ever so visualized those
"orchestras of butterflies that played to Chopin in the sun."

I have still one great wish in the world: that some time I may hear
Paderewski play on a Mason and Hamlin--that piano of unutterable depth
and richness. The fact that he's never used it is the one flaw in his
performances, for no other instrument that I've heard gives you the same
sense of drowning in great waves of warm sound. The combination would
convince even the followers of the new gods. But, old or new, and even
on his cold Steinway, no one has ever drawn from the piano the same
quality of golden tone or dared such simplicity of singing as
Paderewski. To put his genius into a sentence: no one has ever built so
strong a bridge across the gulf that yawns between vision and
accomplishment.




                           The Major Symphony


                              GEORGE SOULE

   Round splendor of the harp's entoned gold
     Throbbing beneath the pleading violins--
     That hundred-choiring voice that wins and wins
   To over-filling song; the bright and bold
   Clamor of trumpets; 'cellos that enfold
     Richly the flutes; and basses that like djinns
     Thunder their clumsy threatening, as begins
   The oboe's mystic plaint of sorrows old:--

   Are these the symphony? No, it is will
     In passion striving to surmount the world,
     Growing in sensuous dalliance, sudden whirled
   To ecstasies of shivering joy, and still
     Marching and mastering, singing mightily,
     Consummate when the silence makes it free.




                      The Prophet of a New Culture


                          GEORGE BURMAN FOSTER

A profound unrest tortures the heart of the modern man. The world,
slaughtering the innocents, is meaningless; life, bruised and
bewildered, is worthless--such is the melancholy mood of modernity.
Today life is a burden to many to whom it was once a joy. Decadents,
they call themselves, who rediscover the elements of their most personal
life in everything that is weary and ailing. We are all more or less
infected with this weariness and ennui. The blows which the spirit
experiences from opposing sides today are so powerful that no one is in
a position to endure them with equanimity. The forces resident within
the soul no longer suffice to give support and stability to life. Hence
our culture has lost faith in itself. Our civilization is played out.
What the Germans call _Weltschmerz_ has come over us. Philosophers have
fashioned it into systems; singers, into song--the sad but not sweet
music of humanity; sufferers all, into a sharp cry for redemption.
Deniers of the malady must have their eyes opened by physicians,
scurrying around curatively in this humanity.

First of all, there are those who borrow their panacea from religion.
They demand a reform of the ecclesiastical life according to the sense
and spirit of primitive Christianity. They propose to recover the
religion of Jesus, and to find in it healing for all the diseases of the
times. But this remedy is so complicated that it reveals rather than
heals the whole disunity and distraction of our present life. It was
Tolstoi, in garb of desert prophet, who would restore original
Christianity. He preached a radical reversal of our cultural life--a
monastic asceticism, a warfare against all life's impulses, on whose
development our culture is founded. And ecclesiastical liberals would do
virtually the same thing when they try to extract from the religion of
Jesus a food that shall be palatable to modern taste, and then call
their _ragout_, compounded according to their own recipe, "original"
Christianity.

There are other voices, noisier and more numerous. These hold
Christianity in all its forms to be the hereditary evil of humanity, and
see the salvation of the world only in a purification of life from every
Christian memory. Owing to the brisk international interchange of ideas
today, Buddhism has awakened a momentary hope, as if from the religion
of far-off India a purer spiritual atmosphere might be wafted to us, in
which we could convalesce from the Christian malady.

Now, what shall we say of all these strivings to heal the hurt of the
modern mind?

All of them have one adverse thing in common: They would tear up an old
tree by its roots, and put in its place another tree equally as old and
equally as rotten. There is something reactionary in all of them. They
want to cure the present by the past. It is precisely this that cannot
be done. If Christianity was once original, spontaneous, creative, it is
so no more. We cannot lead an age back to Jesus, which has grown out
beyond him. And the Buddha-religion is no more youthful and life-giving
than the Jesus-religion. It is indicative of the depth of the disgust
and the extent of the confusion on the part of the man of today that
such a hoary thing as Buddhism can make so great an impression upon him.
A revived, renascent heathenism, even as compared with Christianity,
would mean a reactionary and outlived form of life. That men of moral
endeavor and scientific vision could hope for a substitute for
Christianity, a conquest over Christianity, in a rebirth of paganism, is
a new riddle of the Sphinx.

One way only remains out of the aberration and dividedness of our
present life: not _backward_, but _forward_! No winning of a religious
view of the world in any other way! No pursuit of the tasks of the moral
life by those who seek a real part and place in the modern world, in any
other way!

Hence, a man is coming to be leader--a man who, as no other, embodies in
himself all the pain and all the pleasure, all the sickness and all the
convalescence, all the age and all the youth, of our tumultuous and
tortured times: _Friedrich Nietzsche_!

I do not know how many of you know the poet of _Zarathustra_. But if you
do not know him, if you have never even heard his name, yet you do know
him, for a part of him is in your own heart and hope. If you have ever
thought seriously about yourself, if you have even tried to think
seriously about yourself, you have taken up into yourself a part of
Nietzsche as you have so thought. Even without your knowledge or
intention, you have passed into the world of thought for which the name
of Nietzsche stands. It has been only now and then, in quite significant
turning points in human history, and only in the case of the rarest of
men, that such an influence has gone forth as from this man. Once in the
horizon of his power, and you are held there as by magic. And yet not in
centuries has a name been so reviled and blasphemed as his.
Anathematized from the pulpit, ridiculed from the stage, demolished by
any champion of blatant and blind _bourgeoisie_, refuted regularly by
pedants, he is still Friedrich Nietzsche, and, unlike most preachers,
his congregation grows from year to year. Newspapers, always sensitive
to the pulse-beat of mediocrity, tell us that "the man is dead"; that he
belongs to the past; that he is already forgotten. But he is more alive,
now that he is dead, than he was when he was living. Dead in the flesh,
he is alive in the spirit, as is so often the case. Superficial
misunderstandings, transient externals, regrettable excrescences--these
were interred with his bones. The real and true Nietzsche lives, and has
the keys of death and of hell. Who has the youth has the future--and
this is why the future belongs to Nietzsche; for no contemporary so
gathers the youth under his shining banner. And it is because the moral
seething of our time, our struggle with questions of the moral life, are
recapitulated and epitomized in Nietzsche, that he stands out, like an
Alpine apocalypse, as the new prophet of our new day. The mysterious
need of a man to find himself in another, another in himself, as deep
calls unto deep or star shines unto star, is met in the resources of the
great personality of Nietzsche.

The new day whose billows bear us afar began with doubt. First, a doubt
of the Church and its divine authority. A violent, devastating storm
swept over popular life. The storm was speedily exorcised. Again--

              "The sea of faith
      Was once, too, at the full, and round earth's shore
      Lay like the folds of a bright girdle furled."

A new faith emerged from the old doubt, like sweet waters in a bitter
sea, and kept man a living soul.

      "The sea is calm tonight;
      The tide is full."

But the calm proves to be treacherous. The tide of the new faith now in
the bible, and in the doctrine derived from the bible, went back to sea,
and now I only hear

      "Its melancholy, long, withdrawing roar,
      Retreating to the breath
      Of the night-wind down the vast edges drear
      And naked shingles of the world."

The human spirit urged a new, mightier protest against the "It is
written," which was said to put an end to all doubt. The new doubt, as
free inquiry, as protestant science, flung down the gauntlet to the
bible faith. No page of the sacred book remained untouched. Only one
certainty sprang from this new doubt--the certainty that the sacred book
was a human book. Therefore it had no right to rule over man. Man was
its judge; it was not man's judge. It must be measured by man's truth,
man's conscience.

How, now, should the timorous heart of man be quieted in the presence of
this new doubt? At once new props were offered him--truth and the state.
What science recognized as "true," what morals and _bourgeoise_ customs
and civil law sanctioned as "good"--these were now proffered man, that
he might brace up his tottering life thereby. "Trust the light of
science, and you shall indeed have the light of life; do what is 'good,'
and you shall be crowned with the crown of life." This was the
watchword. Then there stirred in the womb of present-day humanity the
last, ultimate, uncanniest doubt. If we doubt the Church, why not doubt
the state, too? If we doubt faith, why not doubt science, too? If we
doubt the bible, why not doubt reason, doubt knowledge, doubt morality?
Even if what we call "true" be really true, can it make us happy? Can
the men who have all the knowledge of our time at their disposal, can
the scholars, can the cultivated, really become fit leaders of humanity
through life's little day? Is not that which is called "good" grievous
impediment in our pilgrimage? Law, morals--are not these perhaps a
blunder of history, an old hereditary woe with which humanity is
weighted down?

This doubt--long and ominously maturing throughout the spiritual
evolution of our new time--finds its most radical, most conscious, and
most eloquent expression in Friedrich Nietzsche. He launches this doubt
not only against all that has been believed and thought and done, but
against all that men believe and think and do today. He shakes every
position which men have held to be unshakable. An irresistible,
diabolical curiosity impels him to transvalue all values with which men
have reckoned, and to inquire whether they are values at all; whether
"good" must not be called evil, "truth" error. As Nietzsche ventures
upon this experiment of his curiosity, as he advances farther and
farther with it, suddenly he laughs with an ironic, uproarious laughter.
The experiment is a success! In the new illumination all the colors of
life change. Light is dark, dark is light. What men had appraised as
food, as medicine, evinced itself to be dangerous poison, miserably
encompassing their doom. And since men believed that all the forces
present, dying, poisoned culture, were resident in their "morals" and
their "Christianity," it was necessary to smash the tables of these old
values. In full consciousness of his calling as destroyer of these old
tables, Nietzsche called himself the immoralist, the anti-Christ. Morals
and Christianity signified to him the most dangerous maladies with which
men were suffering. He considered it to be his high calling as savior to
heal men of these maladies. He sprang into the breach as
anti-Christ. Like Voltaire, he was the apostle and genius of
disrespect--respectability was the only disgrace, popularity the only
perdition.

Nietzsche the Immoralist, Nietzsche the Antichrist! Dare we write his
name and name his writings without calling down upon our much-pelted
heads the wrath of the gods? Does he not blaspheme what is sacred, and
must we not, then, give him a wide berth? There are the familiar words
concerning false prophets in sheep's clothing, but ravening wolves
within. Such wolves there are--smooth, sleek men, paragons of "virtue,"
and "morals," and "faith," but revolting enough in their inner rawness
as soon as you get a glimpse of their true disposition. Conversely,
might there not be men who come to us in wolves' clothing, but whose
hearts are tender and rich and intimate with a pure and noble humanity?
We know such men. Friedrich Nietzsche was one of them. He was a true
prophet. All his transvaluations dealt deadly blows at the old, false,
man-poisoning prophetism. What if more morals matured in this
immoralist, more Christianity in this anti-Christ, more divinity in this
atheist, than in all the pronouncements of all those who today still are
so swift to despise and damn what they do not understand?

Even Christianity, at its origin, in its young and heroic militancy, was
not so amiable and harmless as we are wont to think. It, too, was born
of the doubt of that whole old culture; of the most radical protest
again _status quo_. It, too, leagued with all the revolutionary spirits
of humanity. And it, too, revalued all the values of "faith" and
"morals." What if this new Nietzschean spirit of life's universal
reform, this creative, forward-striving genius of humanity, be once yet
again embodiment and representative of life's essential element of
rejuvenescence and growth? What if true prophets are always men of
_Sturm und Drang_, men of divine discontent, fellow-conspirators with
the Future? Anti-Christs? These are they who blaspheme the holy spirit
of humanity. Immoralists? These are they who say that life is good as it
is, and therefore should stay as it "is" forever. Faith? This is
directed, not to the past, but to the future; not to the certain, but to
the uncertain. Faith is the venturesomeness of moral knighthood.
Nietzsche was a Knight of the Future.

Why, then, should not a magazine of the Future interpret Nietzsche the
prophet of a new culture? Man as the goal, beauty as the form, life as
the law, eternity as the content of our new day--this is Nietzsche's
message to the modern man. In such an interpretation, Man and Superman
should be the subject of the next article.




                        How a Little Girl Danced


                        NICHOLAS VACHEL LINDSAY

         _Being a Reminiscence of Certain Private Theatricals_

                       (Dedicated to Lucy Bates)

   Oh, cabaret dancer,
   _I_ know a dancer
   Whose eyes have not looked
   On the feasts that are vain.
   _I_ know a dancer,
   _I_ know a dancer,
   Whose soul has no bond
   With the beasts of the plain:
   Judith the dancer,
   Judith the dancer,
   With foot like the snow
   And with step like the rain.

   Oh, thrice-painted dancer,
   Vaudeville dancer,
   Sad in your spangles,
   With soul all astrain:
   _I_ know a dancer,
   _I_ know a dancer,
   Whose laughter and weeping
   Are spiritual gain;
   A pure-hearted, high-hearted
   Maiden evangel
   With strength the dark cynical
   Earth to disdain.

   Flowers of bright Broadway!
   You of the chorus
   Who sing in the hope
   Of forgetting your pain:
   I turn to a sister
   Of sainted Cecelia,
   A white bird escaping
   The earth's tangled skein!--
   The music of God
   In her innermost brooding!
   The whispering angels
   Her footsteps sustain!

   Oh, proud Russian dancer:
   Praise for your dancing!
   No clean human passion
   My rhyme would arraign.
   You dance for Apollo
   With noble devotion:
   A high-cleansing revel
   To make the heart sane.
   But Judith the dancer
   Prays to a spirit
   More white than Apollo
   And all of his train.

   _I_ know a dancer
   Who finds the true God-head;
   Who bends o'er a brazier
   In Heaven's clear plain.
   _I_ know a dancer,
   _I_ know a dancer,
   Who lifts us toward peace
   From this Earth that is vain:--
   Judith the dancer,
   Judith the dancer,
   With foot like the snow,
   And with step like the rain.




                       The Dream of the Children


      The children awoke in their dreaming
        While earth lay dewy and still:
      They followed the rill in its gleaming
        To the heart-light of the hill.

      From their feet as they strayed in the meadow
        It led through caverned aisles,
      Filled with purple and green light and shadow
        For mystic miles on miles.

                                  --_From A. E.'s Collected Poems._




                          The Critics' Critic


                         GALSWORTHY AS A GREEK

Do you read Arthur Guiterman's rhymed reviews? They are not to be taken
too seriously, of course, though they are generally sane; but in the one
on _The Dark Flower_ he asks if such things don't tend to weaken our
moral fiber! Wow! Probably Homer might be said to do the same thing;
we'd better take it out of the schools, hadn't we? There's an episode I
recall about a female person named Helen, who was torn from her adoring
husband, etc., etc. You know I don't believe in weakening moral fiber,
but beauty _is_ beauty. All I could think of, in reading _The Dark
Flower_, was Greek classics. Do you remember that exquisite thing (is it
Euripides?)--

      "This Cyprian
      She is a million, million changing things;
      She brings more joy than any god,
      She brings
      More pain. I cannot judge her; may it be
      An hour of mercy when she looks on me."

Galsworthy's hero was just a Greek, swayed by Aphrodite. There's no
question of morals. And besides, he behaved pretty well--for a man!


                       THE CASE OF RUPERT BROOKE

I can't share THE LITTLE REVIEW'S estimate of Rupert Brooke. I'm
reminded immediately of something I found not long ago by Herbert
Trench:

      "Come, let us make love deathless, thou and I,
        Seeing that our footing on the earth is brief,
      Seeing that her multitudes sweep out to die
        Mocking at all that passes their belief.
      For standard of our love not theirs we take
          If we go hence today
      Fill the high cup that is so soon to break
          With richer wine than they.

      Ay, since beyond these walls no heavens there be,
        Joy to revive or wasted youth repair,
      I'll not bedim the lovely flame in thee
        Nor sully the sad splendor that we wear.
      Great be the love, if with the lover dies
          Our greatness past recall;
      And nobler for the fading of those eyes
          The world seen once for all."

Swinburne's

      "From too much love of living,
      From hope and fear set free"

I like better so far as the music of it is concerned; and fully as well,
perhaps, as far as ideas go. There is something rather conscious and
posing in Mr. Trench's effort. And you see why I think of him when I
read Rupert Brooke. There is the same _memento mori_, the same
hopelessness of outlook. It seems a pity to me, when a man can write as
well as Brooke does in _The Hill_ and in that exquisite sonnet beginning
"Oh! Death will find me, long before I tire of watching you," that he
should waste his time on stupid, unpleasant cynicisms like _Wagner_ and
that _Channel Passage_, in which he doesn't know which pain to
choose--nausea or memory. I believe an Englishman can't achieve just the
right degree of mockery and brutality necessary for such an effort. Take
Heine, if you will--(I'm a Heine enthusiast); _he_ could do it with
supreme artistry. Do you remember the sea poems--especially the one
where he looks into the depths of the sea, catches sight of buried
cities and sees his lost love ("ein armes, vergessenes Kind")? It
finishes with the captain pulling him in by the heels, crying, "Doktor,
sind Sie des Teufels?" Heine can touch filth and offer it to you, and
you are rather amused--as at a child. But Englishmen are too
self-conscious for anything of that sort. You are shocked and ashamed
when they try it, feeling in a way defiled yourself by reading. It
irritates me, and I wish Mr. Brooke would stop it, right away. He's too
worth while to waste himself.


                        THE FEMINIST DISCUSSIONS

Do you know the story of the man, elected by some political pull to a
judgeship in Indiana, who, after listening to the argument for the
plaintiff, refused to hear anything further. "That feller wins," he said
decisively. On being told that it was customary and necessary to hear
the defendant's side also, he duly listened, with growing amazement.
"Don't it beat all?" he said, pathetically, at the close; "now the other
feller wins."

In much the same frame of mind I read the articles that are appearing in
the current magazines on the subject of feminism and militancy. Edna
Kenton's in _The Century_ is the only one that is content to give one
side of the case. Decidedly, you will say on reading it, "That feller
wins." _The Atlantic_ prints an admirable article by W. L. George on
Feminist Intentions, and follows it hastily with a rebuttal by E. S.
Martin (_Much Ado About Women_), fearing, I imagine, lest it would seem
to be bowing its venerable head before new, profane altars. _Life_ gets
out a really excellent suffrage number, sane and logical and reasonable,
and has followed it up ever since with all the flings it can collect
against suffrage, militancy, or feminism in any form. A recent amusing
instance of this is a letter by one Thomas H. Lipscomb, who signs
himself, alack! A Modern Man, and adds that his name is legion. Judging
by the terror in the communication Mr. Lipscomb's modernity goes back as
far as the Old Testament Proverbs, and the womanly ideal he so
passionately upholds is in all respects the one the writer of this
particular proverb acclaims. I have heard it used as a text so often,
and have had it grounded into the very framework of my being so
consistently, that it seems almost strange and irreverent to regard it
with an alien and critical eye. And yet--just see what is expected of
the poor thing: She

      Seeketh wool and flax and worketh willingly with her hands.
      Bringeth her food from afar.
      Riseth while it is yet night and giveth meat to her household;
      Considereth a field, and buyeth it; with the fruit of her hands
         planteth a vineyard.
      Her candle goeth not out by night.

She

      Layeth her hands to the spindle; and her hands hold the
         distaff.
      Maketh fine linen, and selleth it, and delivereth girdles unto the
         merchant....

together with a few other airy trifles such as bearing and rearing
children, I suppose. But most significant of all--

      Her husband is known in the gates where he sitteth among the
         elders of the land.

I should think so indeed! There seems to be little else left for him to
do.

I can almost hear the writer smacking his lips over this description,
which no doubt tallies closely with Mr. Lipscomb's own notions.

For all this she is to

      Receive of the fruit of her own hands, and her own works shall
         praise her.

Possibly women have tired a little of letting their own works praise
them--and nothing else! But I am taking the letter too seriously.

To go back to _The Atlantic_, I find Mr. George, who is in full sympathy
with the movement of which he writes, classifying the demands of the
feminists as follows: Economically, they intend to open every occupation
to women; they intend to level the wages of women; in general, they wish
to change the attitude of those who regard women's present inferiority
to men (they frankly admit that there is inferiority in many respects)
as inherent and insuperable, by demonstrating that it is due merely to
long lack of thorough training--(an old friend, apparently, in a new
dress!) They wish also gradually to modify and change existing marriage
laws so that they will be equally fair to both sexes.

A careful re-reading of Mr. Martin's article fails to reveal much in the
way of counter argument to Mr. George's forcible appeal. There's a great
deal of courteous agreement and some rather good satire, but against the
specific counts of the feminists' intentions Mr. Martin raises no
telling argument. We hear that whereas fathers wish all earthly
blessings for their daughters, mothers do not, as women are jealous of
women; also that mothers fear the modern woman on account of their sons,
for whom they in turn wish all possible good: the modern woman will not
make a good wife! Angels and ministers of grace defend us! In a double
quality as daughter to a devoted and loving mother, and as a devoted and
loving mother to a most precious daughter, I throw down my glove.

I am sure Mr. Martin has never acted in either of these capacities, so
precious little he knows about it! Besides, I do want my son to have
everything that the world provides in the way of blessings and
happiness, so I want him to have as a wife a thoroughly modern woman
with an awakened soul and a high ideal, to finish the good work in him
which I have at least endeavored to begin.

As I read further, however, the cat begins to poke a cautious head out
of the bag. Women, Mr. Martin argues, are not responsible for the
blessings the feminist movement is trying to bring them. It is men! That
is why he is so particular to tell us of the careful solicitude of a
father for his daughters. Men, right along, have procured all happiness
for women; or, if not men exactly, at least a sort of _Zeit Geist_--I
believe he calls it "necessity." And the poor deluded feminists are
simply the little boys running along by the side of the procession and
hollering. The procession is made up of vague forces, "working nowadays
for the enlargement and betterment of life for women"--forces, he
quaintly complains, that are "making things go too fast their way
already."

So we must take all credit from Luther and Knox and Calvin and the
reformers of all times and give it to the _Zeit Geist_. They, too, are
little boys, I suppose, who ran along and hollered. At least they
hollered lustily and well, and the feminists are in good company.

And the peroration--every true woman will appreciate this: "What a
husband sees in forty years, maybe, of the good and bad of life for a
woman; what a father sees in his daughters and the conditions of modern
life as they affect girls--those are the things which count in forming
or changing the convictions of men about woman's errand in this current
world."

Well! However far the _Zeit Geist_ has progressed in other directions,
it is plain that it has not made inroads on Mr. Martin's consciousness
of the present state of affairs. Who has given men the power and right
to decide about woman's errand in the world? For lo! these many years we
have been letting husbands, fathers, and brothers decide for us just
what it were best for us to do; and if the new idea has any significance
at all it is just this: that we feel able to decide for ourselves what
we most want and need.

                                                              M. H. P.




                              The New Note


                           SHERWOOD ANDERSON

The new note in the craft of writing is in danger, as are all new and
beautiful things born into the world, of being talked to death in the
cradle. Already a cult of the new has sprung up, and doddering old
fellows, yellow with their sins, run here and there crying out that they
are true prophets of the new, just as, following last year's exhibit,
every age-sick American painter began hastily to inject into his own
work something clutched out of the seething mass of new forms and new
effects scrawled upon the canvases by the living young cubists and
futurists. Confused by the voices, they raised also their voices,
multiplying the din. Forgetting the soul of the workman, they grasped at
lines and solids, getting nothing.

In the trade of writing the so-called new note is as old as the world.
Simply stated, it is a cry for the reinjection of truth and honesty into
the craft; it is an appeal from the standards set up by money-making
magazine and book publishers in Europe and America to the older, sweeter
standards of the craft itself; it is the voice of the new man, come into
a new world, proclaiming his right to speak out of the body and soul of
youth, rather than through the bodies and souls of the master craftsmen
who are gone.

In all the world there is no such thing as an old sunrise, an old wind
upon the cheeks, or an old kiss from the lips of your beloved; and in
the craft of writing there can be no such thing as age in the souls of
the young poets and novelists who demand for themselves the right to
stand up and be counted among the soldiers of the new. That there are
such youths is brother to the fact that there are ardent young cubists
and futurists, anarchists, socialists, and feminists; it is the promise
of a perpetual sweet new birth of the world; it is as a strong wind come
out of the virgin west.

One does not talk of his beloved even among the friends of his beloved;
and so the talk of the new note in writing will be heard coming from the
mouths of the aged and from the lips of oily ones who do not know of
what they talk, but run about in circles, making noise and clamor. Do
not be confused by them. They but follow the customs of their kind. They
are the stript priests of the falling temples, piling stone on stone to
build a new temple, that they may exact tribute as before.

Something has happened in the world of men. Old standards and old ideas
tumble about our heads. In the dust and confusion of the falling of the
timbers of the temple many voices are raised. Among the voices of the
old priests who weep are raised also the voices of the many who cry,
"Look at us! We are the new! We are the prophets; follow us!"

Something has happened in the world of men. Temples have been wrecked
before only to be rebuilt, and destroying youth has danced only to
become in turn a builder and in time a priest, muttering old words.
Nothing in all of this new is new except this--that beside the youth
dancing in the dust of the falling timbers is a maiden also dancing and
proclaiming herself. "We will have a world not half new but all new!"
cry the youth and the maiden, dancing together.

Do not be led aside by the many voices crying of the new. Be ready to
accept hardship for the sake of your craft in America--that is craft
love.




                  Some Letters of William Vaughn Moody


     Edited, with introduction, by Daniel Gregory Mason. (Houghton
                       Mifflin Company, Boston.)

I shall never forget how, at sixteen, I read Stevenson's letters and
thought them the most beautiful things in the world. I shall never
forget similar experiences with Keats and Browning, and finally with
Meredith; and now comes another volume of letters by the man who might
be called the American Henley (though that only does him half justice)
to keep one up at night and teach him unforgettable things. People have
been saying that this collection doesn't represent the best letters
Moody wrote. Certainly if he wrote more interesting ones the world ought
to be allowed to see them, for these are valuable enough to become an
American tradition.

The following is typical:

                       _To Daniel Gregory Mason._

   DEAR DAN:

   I have just heard from your sister-in-law of your enforced
   furlough. I am not going to help you curse your luck, knowing
   your native capabilities in that direction to be perfectly
   adequate, but my Methodist training urges me to give you an
   epistolary hand-shake, the purport of which is "_Keep your
   sand._" I could say other things, not utterly pharisaical. I
   could say what I have often said to myself, with a rather reedy
   tremolo perhaps, but swelling sometimes into a respectable
   diapason. "The dark cellar ripens the wine." And meanwhile, after
   one's eyes get used to the dirty light, and one's feet to the
   mildew, a cellar has its compensations. I have found beetles of
   the most interesting proclivities, mice altogether comradely and
   persuadable, and forgotten potatoes that sprouted toward the
   crack of sunshine with a wan maiden grace not seen above. I don't
   want to pose as resourceful, but I have seen what I have seen.

   The metaphor is however happily inexact in your case, with Milton
   to retire to and Cambridge humming melodiously on the horizon. If
   you can only throttle your Daemon, or make him forgoe his leonine
   admonition "Accomplish," and roar you as any sucking dove the
   sweet vocable "Be"--you ought to live. I have got mine trained to
   that, pardee! and his voice grows not untunable. I pick up shreds
   of comfort out of this or that one of God's ashbarrels. Yesterday
   I was skating on a patch of ice in the park, under a poverty
   stricken sky flying a pitiful rag of sunset. Some little muckers
   were guying a slim raw-boned Irish girl of fifteen, who circled
   and darted under their banter with complete unconcern. She was in
   the fledgling stage, all legs and arms, tall and adorably
   awkward, with a huge hat full of rusty feathers, thin skirts
   tucked up above spindling ankles, and a gay aplomb and swing in
   the body that was ravishing. We caught hands in midflight, and
   skated for an hour, almost alone and quite silent, while the rag
   of sunset rotted to pieces. I have had few sensations in life
   that I would exchange for the warmth of her hand through the
   ragged glove, and the pathetic curve of the half-formed breast
   where the back of my wrist touched her body. I came away
   mystically shaken and elate. It is thus the angels converse. She
   was something absolutely authentic, new, and inexpressible,
   something which only nature could mix for the heart's
   intoxication, a compound of ragamuffin, pal, mistress, nun,
   sister, harlequin, outcast, and bird of God,--with something else
   bafflingly suffused, something ridiculous and frail and savage
   and tender. With a world offering such rencontres, such aery
   strifes and adventures, who would not live a thousand years stone
   dumb? I would, for one--until my mood changes and I come to think
   on the shut lid and granite lip of him who has had done with
   sunsets and skating, and has turned away his face from all manner
   of Irish. I am supported by a conviction that at an auction on
   the steps of the great white throne, I should bring more in the
   first mood than the second--by several harps and a stray
   dulcimer.

   I thoroughly envy you your stay at Milton--wrist, Daemon, and
   all. You must send me a lengthy account of the state of things at
   Cambridge.... If the wrist forbids writing, employ a typewriter
   of the most fashionable tint--I will pay all expenses and stand
   the breakage. I stipulate that you shall avoid blonds, however,
   they are fragile.

                                              WILLIAM VAUGHN MOODY.

There are over a hundred letters here, written to Mr. Mason, Percy
MacKaye, Richard Watson Gilder, Josephine Preston Peabody, Edmund
Clarence Stedman, Henry Miller, Robert Morss Lovett, Ferdinand Schevill,
and others; and every one of them shows Moody's remarkable gift of
metaphor, his constant striving to "win for language some new swiftness,
some rare compression," his belief in the positive acceptance of life,
his paganism, "deeply spiritual, and as far as possible removed from the
sensualism the thoughtless have found in it." Mr. Mason furnishes an
introduction that is masterly; and the first and final drafts of
_Heart's Wild Flower_ are included, proving vividly how this poet
disciplined his rich imaginative gifts, training away from a native
tendency to the rococo to the high, pure dignity that marks his finished
verse. This volume is invaluable. Certainly with two such authentic
voices to boast of as Whitman's and Moody's this young country of ours
has reason to be proud.

                                                              M. C. A.




                   A Feminist of a Hundred Years Ago


                             MARGERY CURREY

    _Rahel Varnhagen_: A Portrait, by Ellen Key. Translated from the
     Swedish by Arthur G. Chater; with an introduction by Havelock
                Ellis. (G. P. Putman's Sons, New York.)

For certain distinctive women Rahel Varnhagen lived; for the same women
Ellen Key has written this appreciation of Rahel. By the woman to whom
fine freedom of living and fearlessness and directness of thought are
the only possible terms on which she may deal with the social situation
in which she finds herself this book will be read and re-read, and
pencil-marked along the margins of its pages.

The rare woman, here and there, who worships simple, direct thinking
(which, after all, takes the most courage) will know how to value Rahel.
Always she thought truthfully. The woman who has been filled with joyful
new amazement on finding that her only reliance is on herself--that she
may not depend upon this person or that convention to preserve her
happiness--will know how to value her. Just so far as any woman of today
has become interested in her own thoughts and work, is the originator of
ideas, and knows the joy of making or doing something that more than all
else in the world she wants to make or do, so far she is nearer to
becoming of the size of this great woman.

Such a woman will share with Rahel Varnhagen the certainty that higher
morality is reached only through higher liberty; such a woman must
demand, as did Rahel, periods of that recuperative and strengthening
solitude, both of thought and mode of living, which only the
self-reliant and fearless can endure. She knows that she herself, not
convention, must furnish the answer to questions of right and wrong by
earnest, free inquiry and by testing every experience. The acceptance of
no convention was inevitable to Rahel, as she thought of it. She put it
to the best of scrutiny. What value was there in it? It was not
violating conventions which she set out to do, but meeting them with a
quiet, sincere inquiry of the reason and truth they contained.

Rahel Varnhagen lived in Berlin a hundred years ago and was probably the
most beloved and much-visited woman of those whose salons attracted the
notable men of the day--Fichte, Hegel, Prince Louis Ferdinand, Fouque,
the Humboldts, the Schlegels, Schleiermacher, and other giants of the
time. Rahel was a woman--the lamentable rarity of them!--whose influence
was not through her literary work (her letters to friends are all that
we have of her writing), not through brilliancy of speech alone, nor
through her munificent patronage of the artists and literary men of her
day (she was not rich, and we read of the garret in which she
entertained her friends), but through the richness of her personality,
the glowing warmth of her sympathy, her understanding, and the wisdom of
her heart.

And the value of Rahel to us lies in the calm directness, the
"innocence," as she herself calls it, of her thinking. To her went the
acclaimed wise men of the day for the comfort of her fearlessness and
simplicity of thought upon their questions. She was said to be
brilliant. She was not brilliant in the sense of being learned, or of
being capable of mere intellectual jugglery and fantastic adroitness of
thinking; she was brilliant in the crystal clearness and the sure
rapidity of her thinking. The unexpectedness and strangeness of the
simple truth she spoke bewildered people. For this reason she could say,
"I am as much alone of my kind as the greatest manifestation here on
earth. The greatest artist, philosopher, or poet is not above me."

This passion for truth in her own thinking was the origin of her social
value. Its stimulus to others was immediate, and her recognition through
it of the important things in life made her detect at once those people
and things that were original and valuable in themselves.

"Rahel's most comprehensive significance," writes Ellen Key, "lay in
augmenting the productiveness, humanity and culture of her time by
herself everywhere seeking and teaching others to seek the truth; by
everywhere encouraging them to manifest their own culture; by imparting
to others her profound way of looking at religion, men and women,
literature and art; by judging everything according to its intrinsic
value, not according to its deficiencies; by everywhere understanding,
because she loved, and giving life, because she believed in liberty."

Think always, ceaselessly!--this was Rahel's cry. This, she said, is the
only duty, the only happiness. To a young friend she wrote, begging that
he keep ploughing through things afresh, telling him that he "must
always have the courage to hurt himself with questioning and doubts; to
destroy the most comfortable and beautiful edifice of thought--one that
might have stood for life--if honesty demands it." And so, having
thought out things in the most utter freedom, unhampered by old
preconceptions, and finally unafraid of the starkness of the truths
which she faced, she let nothing prescribed be her unchallenged guide or
stand as a substitute for her own vigor and hardness of thinking. This
is why she said that she was revived by downright brutality, after being
wearied by insincerity.

A virtue, so called, had to give a very good accounting of itself to
Rahel. She demanded that it answer a certain test before it could be
called a piece of goodness. For instance, in many cases she recognized
in "performance of duty" mere acquiescence--a laziness of mind which
does not bestir itself to ask what right this duty has to impose itself.
Patience to her was often lack of courage to seize upon a situation and
change it to suit the imperative demand to express oneself. "The more I
see and meditate upon the strivings of this world," wrote Rahel, "the
more insane it appears to me day by day not to live according to one's
inmost heart. To do so has such a bad name, because simulacra of it are
in circulation." Of these "simulacra" we are familiar in every age--the
amazing antics of certain self-styled "radicals," the unaccountable
manifestations of those who, while professing liberality of view, seem
to have no standards of values in their extravagances of living. Rahel
could understand every nature except the insincere and unnatural.

While we mourn or exult over the eager efforts of women in our day to
evolve completely human personalities, it is interesting to read Rahel's
summing-up of the feminist movement: "Has it been proved by her
organization that a woman cannot think and express her ideas? If such
were the case, it would nevertheless be her duty to renew the attempt
continually." "And how," exclaims Ellen Key, "would Rahel have abhorred
the tyrannical treatment of each other's opinions, the cramping
narrow-mindedness, the envious jostling, the petty importance of
nobodies, which the woman's cause now exhibits everywhere, since, from
being a movement for liberty in great women's souls, like Rahel's own,
it has become a movement of leagues and unions, in which the small souls
take the lead."

Since it is reality and not appearance that alone could stand before
Rahel's devastating scrutiny of human things, and since to her the
highest personal morality consisted in being true, coercive marriage
seemed to her the great social lie. How could one of her simple clarity
of thinking be anything but outraged by the vulgarities of an average
marriage? "Is not an intimacy without charm or transport more indecent
than ecstasy of what kind so ever?" she demands. "Is not a state of
things in which truth, amenity, and innocence are impossible, to be
rejected for these reasons alone?" Of the evils in Europe she cries,
"Slavery, war, marriage--and they go on wondering and patching and
mending!" Rahel believed that in the existing institution of marriage it
was almost impossible to find a union in which full, clear truth and
mutual love prevailed.

Of Rahel's nature, warm, richly exuberant with a healthy sensuousness
and desire for sunlight, Jean Paul's letter to her gives us the essence.
"Winged one--in every sense--" he wrote, "you treat life poetically and
consequently life treats you in the same way. You bring the lofty
freedom of poetry into the sphere of reality, and expect to find again
the same beauties here as there."

Biographical facts are negligible here. Even comment on the interpretive
insight of Ellen Key seems not to be essential, though without it this
book could not be. It is the personality of Rahel Varnhagen that
matters, and the influence of that personality on the men of her day.

Rahel is distinctive as a challenger of the worn-out social and ethical
baggage that somehow, in all its shabbiness, has been reverently, with
ritual and with authority, given into our keeping by those who were as
oppressed by it as we in turn are expected to be. With the simplicity of
her questioning the honesty of these conventions, Rahel has made worship
of some of them less inevitable.




             Some Contemporary Opinions of Rahel Varnhagen


                          CORNELIA L. ANDERSON

Heine said: "I should wear a dog collar inscribed: 'I belong to Frau
Varnhagen.'"

Rahel's power over the brilliant minds of her day lay in her own
wonderful personality. She was unique, knew it and gloried in it. She
wrote to Varnhagen, her husband and lover: "You will not soon see my
like again." She understood thoroughly the limitations of her sex. "They
are so surprisingly feeble," she says; "almost imbecile from lack of
coherence. They lie, too, since they are often obliged to, and since the
truth demands intelligence." ... "I know women: what is noble in their
composition keeps together stupidity or madness." ... And she speaks of
their "clumsy, terrible stupidity in lying." But, despite Rahel's
opinion of women, or because of her understanding of their needs, she
was a true feminist and looked toward their liberation through
development and self-expression.

Ellen Key writes: "How Rahel, with her lucidity of thought, would have
exposed the modern superstition that it is in _outward_ departments of
work that woman gives expression to her human 'individuality.' She says
by true economy 'nature keeps woman nearer to the plant'! This 'economy'
is easily understood; it is because the tender life is woman's creation
and because that life requires tranquillity for its genesis and growth;
because a woman taken up by the problems of external life ... no longer
possesses the psychological qualifications which are indispensable in
order that a child's soul may grow in peace and joy; because, in other
words, _children_ need _mothers_, not only for their physical birth but
for their human bringing-up. Rahel hits the very center of the spiritual
task of motherhood when she says that if she had a child she would help
it to learn to listen to its own inmost ego; everything else she would
sacrifice to this.... The progress or ruin of humanity depends, in
Rahel's prophetic view, upon the capacity of the mothers for performing
their task."

How Rahel had listened to her own inmost ego is shown by the following
characterization by Ellen Key. "Rahel probably did not know a single
date in the history of Greece, but she read Homer in Voss's translation;
it made her declare that 'the Odyssey seems to me so beautiful that it
is positively painful,' and she discovered that Homer is always great
when he speaks of water, as Goethe is when he speaks of the stars.
Probably she could not enumerate the rivers of Spain, but she knew _Don
Quixote_. In a word, she was the very opposite of the kind of talent
that passes brilliant examinations and is capable of carrying
'completely undigested sentences in its head.' What Rahel could not
transform into blood of her blood did not concern her at all. There was
such an indestructible 'connection between her abilities,' such an
intimate 'co-operation between her temperament and her intelligence,'
that there was no room in her for all the unoriginal ballast of which
the views and opinions of most other people are made up: she could only
keep and only give what was her own."

What Rahel's power over her contemporaries was we may gather from what
they say of her who was "Rahel and nothing more:"

Heine describes her as "the most inspired woman in the universe." T.
Mundt calls her "the sympathetic nerve of the time." The Austrian
dramatist, Grillparzer, relates: "Varnhagen went home with me. As we
passed his house, it occurred to him to introduce me to his wife, the
afterwards so celebrated Rahel, of whom I then knew nothing. I had been
strolling about all day and felt tired to death, and was, therefore,
heartily glad when we were told that Frau Varnhagen was not at home. But
as we came down the stairs, she met us and I submitted to my fate. But
now the lady,--elderly, perhaps never handsomer, shriveled by illness,
reminding me rather of a fairy, not to say a witch,--began to talk, and
I was altogether enchanted. My weariness disappeared, or perhaps,
rather, gave way to intoxication. She talked and talked till nearly
midnight, and I don't know whether they turned me out or whether I went
away of my own accord. Never in my life have I heard anyone talk more
interestingly. Unfortunately it was near the end of my stay, and I could
not repeat the visit."




                      The Poetry of Rupert Brooke


                          MARGARET C. ANDERSON

       _Poems_, by Rupert Brooke. (Sidgwick and Jackson, London.)

The unusual thing about Rupert Brooke--the young Oxford don whose poetry
is just finding its way in this country--is that he has graduated from
the French school without having taken a course in decadence. The result
is a type of English poetry minus those qualities we think of as typical
of "the British mind" and plus those that stand as the highest
expression of the French spirit. There is nothing of self-conscious
reserve about Mr. Brooke; and yet it is not so obvious a quality as his
frank, unashamed revealment that places him definitely with the French
type. It is rather a matter of form--that quality of saying a thing in
the most economic way it can be said, of finding the simple and the
inevitable word. Mr. Brooke stands very happily between a poet like
Alfred Noyes, in whom one rarely finds that careful selection, and the
esthetes whose agony in that direction becomes monotonous. For example,
in the first sonnet of this collection:

      Oh! Death will find me, long before I tire
        Of watching you; and swing me suddenly
      Into the shade and loneliness and mire
        Of the last land! There, waiting patiently,

      One day, I think, I'll feel a cool wind blowing,
        See a slow light across the Stygian tide,
      And hear the Dead about me stir, unknowing,
        And tremble. And I shall know that you have died,

      And watch you, a broad-browed and smiling dream,
        Pass, light as ever, through the lightless host,
      Quietly ponder, start, and sway, and gleam--
        Most individual and bewildering ghost!--

      And turn, and toss your brown delightful head
      Amusedly, among the ancient Dead.

There are about eighteen words in this one sonnet chosen with infinite
pains; and yet the effect of the whole is quite unlabored--an effect of
spontaneity reduced to its simplest terms.

Perhaps the point can be made more emphatically by a miscellaneous
quotation of single lines, because the poignancy of Rupert Brooke's
phrasing leaves me in a torment of inexpressiveness, forced to quote him
rather than talk about him. Here are a few: "Like hills at noon or
sunlight on a tree"; "And dumb and mad and eyeless like the sky"; "The
soft moan of any grey-eyed lute-player"; "Some gaunt eventual limit of
our light"; "Red darkness of the heart of roses"; "And long noon in the
hot calm places"; "My wild sick blasphemous prayer"; "Further than
laughter goes, or tears, further than dreaming"; "Against the black and
muttering trees"; "And quietness crept up the hill"; "When your swift
hair is quiet in death"; "Savage forgotten drowsy hymns"; "And dance as
dust before the sun"; "The swift whir of terrible wings"; "Like flies on
the cold flesh"; "Clear against the unheeding sky"; "So high a beauty in
the air"; "Amazed with sorrow"; "Haggard with virtue"; "Frozen smoke";
"Mist-garlanded," and a thousand other things that somehow have a
fashion of striking twelve. There's a long poem about a fish, beginning

      In a cool curving world he lies
      And ripples with dark ecstasies.

that flashes through every tone of the stream's "drowned colour" from
"blue brilliant from dead starless skies" to "the myriad hues that lie
between darkness and darkness." And there's one about Menelaus and Helen
containing this description:

      High sat white Helen, lonely and serene.
        He had not remembered that she was so fair,
      And that her neck curved down in such a way;

The simplicity of that last line--but what a picture it is!

The important things about Mr. Brooke, however--and of course this
should have been said in the first paragraph--are his sense of life and
his feeling for nature. Of the first it might be said that he is strong
and radiant and sure--and at the same time reverently impotent. _The
Hill_, which I like better than anything in this collection, will
illustrate:

      Breathless, we flung us on the windy hill,
        Laughed in the sun, and kissed the lovely grass.
        You said, "Through glory and ecstasy we pass;
      Wind, sun, and earth remain, the birds sing still,
      When we are old, are old...." "And when we die
        All's over that is ours; and life burns on
      Through other lovers, other lips," said I,
      --"Heart of my heart, our heaven is now, is won!"

      "We are Earth's best, that learnt her lesson here.
      Life is our cry. We have kept the faith!" we said;
        "We shall go down with unreluctant tread
      Rose-crowned into the darkness!" ... Proud we were,
      And laughed, that had such brave true things to say.
      --And then you suddenly cried, and turned away.

Everything in it--with the exception of "kissed the lovely grass," which
might easily be spared--is fine; "with unreluctant tread Rose-crowned
into the darkness!" is vivid with beauty; and when the simple dignity of
"such brave true things to say" has swung you to its great height, the
drop in that sudden last line comes with the most moving wistfulness.
There are several poems, too long to quote here, which show Mr. Brooke's
affinity with the outdoors; but perhaps even five lines from one of them
will suggest it:

      Then from the sad west turning wearily,
      I saw the pines against the white north sky,
      Very beautiful, and still, and bending over
      Their sharp black heads against a quiet sky
      And there was peace in them....

Not long ago I asked a poet in whose judgment I have a profound belief,
to read these poems of Rupert Brooke's and give me his opinion. After
looking at two or three he said he was afraid he wasn't going to like
them, but the next day he reported that he wished to retract, making the
magnificent concession that "_some_ of Brooke's moods are healthy!" Of
course there are a number of things in this volume that can easily be
interpreted as unhealthy or repulsive, like the _Wagner_:

      Creeps in half wanton, half asleep,
        One with a fat wide hairless face.
      He likes love music that is cheap;
        Likes women in a crowded place;
          And wants to hear the noise they're making.

      His heavy eyelids droop half-over,
        Great pouches swing beneath his eyes.
      He listens, thinks himself the lover,
        Heaves from his stomach wheezy sighs;
          He likes to feel his heart's a-breaking.

      The music swells. His gross legs quiver.
        His little lips are bright with slime.
      The music swells. The women shiver,
        And all the while, in perfect time
          His pendulous stomach hangs a-shaking.

But it seems something more than that to me. As an attack on German
emotionalism--however unjustly, from my point of view, through
Wagner--the poem struck me as an exercise of extraordinary cleverness. I
don't know that anyone has ever said so effectively the things that
ought be said about that type of emotion which feeds not upon life but,
inversely, upon emotion.

Mr. Brooke's pictures have much of the quality of Boecklin's. That first
sonnet can be imagined in the same tone values as Boecklin's wonderful
_Isle of the Dead_, and the closing lines of _Victory_ need the same
medium:

              Down the supernal roads,
        With plumes a-tossing, purple flags far flung,
      Rank upon rank, unbridled, unforgiving,
        Thundered the black battalions of the Gods.

_Seaside_ needs an artist like Leon Dabo:

      Swiftly out from the friendly lilt of the band,
        The crowd's good laughter, the loved eyes of men,
        I am drawn nightward; I must turn again
      Where, down beyond the low untrodden strand,
      There curves and glimmers outward to the unknown
        The old unquiet ocean. All the shade
      Is rife with magic and movement. I stray alone
        Here on the edge of silence, half afraid,

      Waiting a sign. In the deep heart of me
      The sullen waters swell towards the moon,
      And all my tides set seaward.
                          From inland
      Leaps a gay fragment of some mocking tune,
      That tinkles and laughs and fades along the sand,
      And dies between the seawall and the sea.

How perfect those last three lines are! How skilful, in painting the
sea, to concentrate upon something from inland, making the ocean twice
as old and vast and unquiet because of that little tinkling tune.

One will find in Rupert Brooke various kinds of things, but never
attitudinizing and never insincerity. He is one of the most important of
those young Englishmen who are doing so much for modern poetry. He is
essentially a poet's poet, and yet his feet are deep in the common soil.
Swinburne would have liked him, but the significant thing is that
Whitman would, too. There are several poems I have not mentioned that
Whitman would have loved.




                          Tagore As a Dynamic


                              GEORGE SOULE

   [We do not agree that _Tagore_ is a dynamic; we find him a poet
   whose music is more important than his thinking. But we are glad
   to print this interesting analysis.]

In _The Crescent Moon_, with its ravishing beauty of childhood, in _The
Gardener_, with its passion of love, and especially in _Gitanjali_ and
_Sadhana_ (Macmillan), with their life universal and all-permeating, we
have found the poet Tagore and been grateful. It remains to ask: What
has Tagore done to us? What is he likely to do for the future? What has
been his answer to the promise and the challenge of the world?

Religions have provided one answer. In his zeal of affirmation the
prophet has declared that the individual lives after death; that in some
unseen world completion shall be attained. Yet increasing millions find
this explanation fading into unreality. If one living organism is
perpetuated after its physical dissolution, why not another? We can
account for every particle of life which the blossom loses by its death.
Some has passed to the seed; the rest finds its chemical reaction, which
in turn produces other forms of life--in entirely new individuals. To
assert that the original blossom lives in an unseen form outside the
realm of thought is preposterous. Why should it? Its function has been
accomplished. The sentimentality behind this thinking is a weak prop for
a vigorous mind. And exactly the same reasoning applies to all living
organisms, including man.

The more intelligent part of mankind has also outgrown the conception of
a definite heaven. It is impossible to imagine a satisfactory heaven for
the individual. A place where there is no strife, where everything is
perfection and completion--what joy is to be found there? The essence of
life as we know it is growth and survival; its happiness comes from the
exercise of a function. Growth and survival postulate extinction; in
heaven an individual would evaporate.

Some thinkers have made a substitute "religion of humanity." They find
solace in action tending to make the world a better place; they have
been gratified by an imaginative conception of a future heaven on earth.
As a religion of morality and action this is magnificent. Yet its dogma
does not satisfy. A heaven on earth is no more conceivable than a heaven
anywhere else. If we find our happiness in action, how shall our
descendants find happiness when there are no more evils to conquer?
Though a static condition of blessedness be the goal of humanitarian
endeavor, it is the progress toward it which furnishes the joy.

The Oriental thinker has looked for his answer in a different direction.
Though the individual is partial and unsuccessful, life as a whole is
always triumphant. Cannot the individual by contemplation identify
himself with the world-soul? Can he not tack himself on to this
all-inclusive life by denial and forgetfulness of himself? Brahmin
saints have done so imaginatively. But such an answer is no answer. We
are individuals, after all, and thinking of Nirvana will not rob us of
our separate bodies and minds. Contemplation is not a substitute for
living.

The doctrine of transmigration is equally unsatisfying. If an individual
never succeeds in any single life, innumerable chances will be mere
repetitions of tragedy. The only hope of such a process would be a final
"heaven on earth," which is just as inconceivable as that of the
humanitarians.

We cannot now be satisfied with theological answers. Nor will the world
ever find an answer permanently satisfactory. Is not this as it should
be? A fixed system of thought which answers every spiritual craving must
be a shell around the individual, preventing growth. It finally ceases
to be a dynamic and becomes a wall in the way of the feelers which
mankind is constantly sending into his spiritual environment. It forces
him to rest. It eventually turns all his expansion into the lower planes
of life. It is deadening, suffocating, as soon as he reaches its limits.

Of what nature, then, must be the religion of the modern man and woman?
First of all, it must not be imposed from without; it must grow through
the personality and find its being there. It must not only square with
every known fact of science and thought; it must stimulate to a fervent
desire for new understanding. It must not deny or destroy life; it must
be life's essence. It must ring with a call to the individual to assume
his proper dignity of life. It must harmonize with the laughter of
children and with the bitter beauty of a winter sea. It must flame with
emotion, yet be keen and hard as a sword. And it must be not a
self-constituted standard with which every other thing is arbitrarily
compared, but a principle of growth making necessary in us vision,
strength, freedom, and fearlessness.

It is my feeling that Tagore will suggest to the modern man such a
religion. He gives expression, though not, of course, perfect
expression, to a synthesis of many latent instincts of the modern mind.
He glories in understanding, not only facts and truth, but emotions and
all manifestations of life. He calls us to see vivid beauty wherever it
is found. He acclaims the aid of science in extending man's personality
throughout the universe. He sees the oneness of all life, and bids man
stand erect on account of this eternal and timeless force coursing
through him. He sees the oneness of humanity, and the necessity of
perfecting human relations. He depicts purity without asceticism, vigor
without brutality. He emphasizes joy and action. He does not blink the
fact of death, but robs it of horror by showing it as the natural end of
a victorious life. While he encourages by the idea of an ultimate goal,
he inspires by the conception of a real connection with infinity here
and now. Revering the universal life, he sees that it finds expression
only in individuals, and that the law of our being must be to live as
completely as possible.

Many before Tagore have said these things partially. But it remained for
a poet who combines the intelligence of the Orient with that of the
Occident to say them all, and to say them with such beauty and
simplicity that a large part of the world listens. If he succeeds in
making us conscious of such a religion, he will have quickened life and
made it potent as few artists can.




                     Ethel Sidgwick's "Succession"


                          MARGARET C. ANDERSON

     _Succession_: A Comedy of the Generations, by Ethel Sidgwick.
                 (Small, Maynard and Company, Boston.)

Ethel Sidgwick is the world's next great woman novelist. Though I
confess eagerly that I enjoy her novels more than any novels I've ever
read--I mean it literally--it isn't on so personal a basis that I offer
the judgment. But I'm confident that within ten years the critical
perspective will show her on this pinnacle. Since George Eliot and the
Brontes, I can think of no woman who has focused art and life so
intensely into novel writing--though even as I say this _Ethan Frome_
looms up and leaves me a little uncomfortable. But the important thing
is that Ethel Sidgwick is going to count--enormously.

People who aren't yet aware of her (and there seem to be a lot of them)
can be easily explained as that body of the public that neglects a
masterpiece until it has become the fashion to acclaim it. But Ethel
Sidgwick has written a novel that's more important than any number of
our traditional masterpieces. For instance, it's a much more important
story than _Vanity Fair_; just as _Jean Christophe_ is more valuable
than _Ivanhoe_. The novel of manners has its delightful place, and so
has the historical romance; but the novel that chronicles with subtlety
the intellectual or artistic temper of an age is as much more important
than these as Greek drama is than the moving picture show.

I know there are people who'll read _Succession_ and continue to prefer
Thackeray's geniality to Miss Sidgwick's brilliant seriousness and her
humor that's not at all genial--but rapid, sophisticated, impatient of
comedy in the accepted sense. Ethel Sidgwick might write a radiant
tragedy, or a wistful satire, or a sad comedy; I can never imagine her
being anything so obvious as merely comic--or genial! She doesn't laugh;
she _couldn't_ chuckle; she has just the flash of a smile, and then she
hurries on dazzlingly, as though things were too important to be
anything but passionate about. She doesn't "warm the cockles of your
heart"--or whatever that silly phrase is; and she doesn't do crude, raw
things to show you that she "knows life." She goes down into the
darkness rose-crowned, in Rupert Brooke's gorgeous phrase; when she goes
into the sunlight it is always with something of remembered agony.
That's the fine quality of her vitalism. She's too strong to be hard,
too steel-like to be robust. She's like fire and keen air--to borrow
another poet's phrase. She reflects life through the mirror of a vivid
personality--which is one way of being an important artist. She assumes
that you're also vivid, and quick, and subtle, and this gives her
writing the most beautiful quality of nervousness--the kind you mean
when you're not talking about nerves. In short, Ethel Sidgwick is the
most definitely magnetic personality I've ever felt through a book's
pages.

_Succession_, though complete in itself, is really a sequel to
_Promise_, published a year ago. The sub-title presents the idea, and
can be concretely expanded in a sentence: Antoine, child-wonder
violinist, and the youngest of the celebrated Lemaures, revolts against
the musical ideas of his grandfather. Here it is again--the battle of
youth and age, made particularly interesting because it's a purely
intellectual warfare, and particularly charming because its participants
are such delightful people.

The first glimpse of Antoine is irresistible. After a series of concerts
in England, he is being taken by his uncle to their home in France. M.
Lucien Lemaure has chosen the long route because his nephew has an odd
habit of sleeping better on the water than in any house or hotel on
shore; and while he doesn't understand this nephew, he has vital reasons
for considering him: for upon Antoine's delicate shoulders rests the
musical honor of the family.

   "Sleep well, mon petit," he said, in the tiny cabin. "We are
   going home."

   Antoine, who had no immediate intention of sleeping, was staring
   out of the dim porthole of a fascinating space of the unknown.
   "That is home to you?" he asked vaguely.

   "To be sure. My first youth was passed there, like thine."

   After an interval passed spent in a vain effort to imagine his
   uncle with no hair on his face, Antoine gave it up and recurred
   to the window. "I wish I lived on the sea," he murmured.

In the train, flying toward Paris, Lucien refers to the last London
recital, when Antoine had made both his uncle's and his conductor's
lives a burden by his indifferent rehearsal of his grandfather's latest
composition. Antoine's outburst had outraged Lucien, to whom faith in
his father's character and genius had, all his life, amounted to a
religion.

   "What will you tell him then?" said Antoine, turning his dark
   eyes without deranging his languid attitude along the seat. "Just
   that I said some 'sottises,' the same as always?"

   "He is not a child," thought Lucien instantly. "He is clever,
   maddening. Of course, my action will have to be explained. I
   shall say," he said aloud, with deliberation, "that we differed
   about the concerto. That you were difficult and headstrong over
   that, which is certainly true. You have admitted since that it
   was too much for you, eh?"

   "Yes," said the boy. "It is an awful thing, but I played it. I
   had to have something real that night."

   "You imply my father's composition is not real?"

   "Oh, do not," said the boy, under his breath. "I have remembered
   he is your father now."

   "To be sure," said M. Lucien, with stateliness. "And have you no
   duty to him as well?"

   "I shall see him soon. I shall remember then." Antoine diverted
   his eyes, to his uncle's private relief. "Do you think I do not
   want to remember, after that?"

   "I should think you would be ashamed," said Lucien, by way of the
   last word in argument, and retired to his paper.

   "You like me to be ashamed," said Antoine, snatching the last
   word from him, though still with a manner of extreme languor.
   "Good, then, I have been. It is not"--he watched the trees of
   Normandy sleepily--"a very nice feeling."

   "I am glad you know what it is like, at least," growled his uncle
   into the paper.

   "Don't you?" said his nephew. "What it is like, is to make you
   feel rather sick--all the time--especially while you are playing
   it."

   "What?"

   "The thing you are ashamed of."

How I wanted to hug him!

   "Antoine," said Lucien, rising and discarding the paper, "do not
   be absurd. Here, look at me. You suffered that night at the
   concert, eh? You excited yourself so much, little imbecile. Are
   you tired now?"

   "No, thank you--this is France," replied Antoine. "That is a
   French cow," he murmured, "not so fat. That is a French tree, not
   so thick. The sky is different, and the sun. The concerts will be
   easier, I expect."

But the first glimpse of M. Lemaure, the grandfather, is reassuring. In
fact, he's almost as irresistible as Antoine, making you realize
immediately that the battle is going to be a subtle one, and that it may
be difficult to know which side to take, after all.

The old musician asks about the last recital.

   "I was not at the last orchestral," Lucien answers. "I left him
   in Wurst's charge, and went to the country, ... I should not
   easily desert my post, as you know; but the boy made it clear
   enough he had no use for me. He clung to that sacre concerto of
   Tschedin, which he knows you detest, and which I never thought in
   a condition to perform. He mocked himself of my objections,
   contradicted me, eluded me, and twisted Wurst round his finger at
   rehearsals."

   "And Wurst?"

   "Wurst found him charming. He has Russian blood himself, and had
   known the composer. He has encouraged Antoine's revolutionary
   tendencies from the first. The pair of them took the last concert
   so completely out of my hands that it seemed fruitless to
   remain."

   "Bebe forgot himself," pronounced M. Lemaure, still quite at
   ease. Indeed the situation so reminded him of Antoine's childhood
   that he longed to laugh. "What did he say, and when?"

   "We will not revive it," said Lucien. "When he came to his
   senses, he apologized sufficiently. Perhaps he was not well ...
   when is the first engagement--Sunday?"

   "Let him be for a time. There is no harm."

   Lucien grunted. "I shall not disturb him while he is seasick, if
   that is what you mean. It would do him no harm to play scales all
   the week."

   "Scales--as you will, but not persons. Not Dmitri Tschedin, I
   mean, nor even me. It is intrusive personality, always, that
   disturbs the current of Antoine's philosophy."

   "Father! How absurd."

   "But I have long remarked it. His own individuality fights the
   alien matter, and it is not till he has either rejected it or
   absorbed that he is steady again. Wurst and his Russians have
   excited him--nothing more natural. For me," said M. Lemaure,
   plunging into memory, as he stood by his son's side at the
   window, "at his age, the realm of music did not hold such
   petulant passions, any more than it held flat heresy, like that
   of Sorbier and Duchatel."

   "Antoine adores Duchatel," remarked Lucien. "There is no fighting
   there."

   "Bon!" The old man laughed. "Heresy on the hearth then, if it
   must be so. So long as he does not play the stuff in my hearing."

There are over six hundred pages in the story, and they cover just a
year and a half of Antoine's life. This appears to be an impossible
literary feat; any orthodox novelist will tell you that you can't hold a
reader through six hundred pages with the story of a fourteen-year-old
boy. But Miss Sidgwick's holding power is--well, I read _Succession_
during a brief trip to Boston, and much as I longed to absorb Concord
and all its charms, I found I only had half my capacity with me; the
rest was with Antoine, and it stayed there till in desperation I shut
myself up in a hotel room and saw him safely off to America with his
nice, wholesome, inartistic father. Then came the awful realization that
I'd have to wait a whole year for the next volume--for surely Miss
Sidgwick intends to make a trilogy.

The explanation of this absorption is simply that Antoine is so
interesting. His professional life is dramatic; but even in the
commonest experiences of every day his world is as vivid as it can only
be to a dramatic nature. For instance, in this little scene with his
brother:

   "There was a little thing on legs," he announced, "that went
   under the carpet just now. It was rather horrible, and I have not
   looked for it."

   "A blackbeetle, I presume," said Philip.

   "It was not black," said Antoine. "It was pink--a not-clean pink,
   you understand. I found it"--a pause--"disagreeable."

   "How could you find it when you had not looked for it?" said
   Philip. Another pause, Antoine considering the point, which was
   an old one.

   "You will catch it," he suggested, shooting a soft glance at his
   brother.

   "Why should I?" said Philip. "They're perfectly harmless."

   "I shall dream of it," said Antoine, shutting his eyes. "It was
   too long, do you see, and pink as well." His brow contracted, and
   he finished with gentle conviction. "If it comes upon my bed in
   the night, I shall be sick."

Of course, most interesting of all is his musical development, in which
are involved several personalities of striking character: Duchatel, the
revolutionary, more a son, after the French fashion, than a man or a
musician; Savigny, the celebrated alienist, who treats the child
hypnotically in his severe illnesses; Lemonski, a rival child wonder,
who is like a pig, and vulgar--which it is silly to say, because he is a
beautiful artist, according to Antoine; Reuss, the great German
conductor, and the boy's staunch friend, who hates "the cursed French
training" of making life weigh so heavily on its youth; Jacques
Charretteur, the vagabond violinist, "a man to play French music in
France"; Cecile, the aunt, who has the perception to understand the
little genius with the dark eyes, whose "expression was so beautiful
that she could hardly bear it"; and Ribiera, the famous Spanish pianist,
who "warms" the piano, in Antoine's words, and calls the boy an
intelligent ape, by way of expressing his admiration. All these people
are drawn with consummate skill.

I think one of the most poignant passages in the book, to me, is
Antoine's description of how he had _rate_ the solo at a London concert.
It was at the end of the season, and he had been harassed by a thousand
needless frictions:

   "The first part had gone pretty well, though I did not like how
   the Duchatel sounded. I thought that was the violin, perhaps--and
   a new room. It was a bad room, pretty, but stupid for the sound.
   I heard much too much, so I was sure _they_ were not hearing
   properly. _They_ were extremely still, and made a little clapping
   at the end. I did not find it a good concert, but Wurst in the
   interval said it was very well, and I should not excite myself.
   So when I did not, then I was tired, and it seemed stupider than
   before. And at last that thing came, the Mirski 'Caprice,' which
   you know how detestable. The passages are hard in that thing, but
   I know them. Every morning I played them to Moricz, so now I do
   not trouble.... And then, in the middle of it, I heard Peter Axel
   playing wrong.... And I was frightened horribly.... And I made
   him an awful frown for forgetting it, and Peter was looking at
   me. His face was not happy like it generally is. It was like one
   of those worst dreams. And, of course, I stopped playing, because
   it cannot be like that. And Peter said 'Go back,' very quietly,
   making a lot of little passages and returning for me to find, do
   you see?"

   "He gave you a chance to pick up, eh?" said Philip. "And you
   couldn't."

   "Couldn't! I _would_ not. I was furious--awful.... I said a rude
   thing to Axel in passing, and went off the estrade. And _they_
   all clapped together down there, bah!--though they knew it was
   not finished. They were sorry I had stopped--because they were
   people who like a difficult Caprice, to be amused by it. But I
   was not amused. Nor Peter, very much." He laughed sharply.

   "Don't, I say," said Philip. "It's all over now. It doesn't
   matter, really. Everybody forgets, now and then" ...

   "I do not," said Antoine. "I do not know how it is to forget. I
   know that thing--I know all the little notes, long ago, before
   Moricz--since years. It is not possible to _forget_ a little
   concert piece that you _know_...."

   "Did you go on again?"

   "Yes. After Wurst had finished talking, I had to. I should not
   have for my uncle, but I had to for him. He was violent, Wurst.
   He said it was indigne and loche if I stopped, and a lot of other
   words. He was like a little dog barking. A man like Wurst does
   not 'rater.' He does not know how that is done. His head has all
   the big scores inside.... He did not see how it was for me to
   stand up on the estrade again, with quantities of beautiful
   people looking kind. It would have been so better if they had
   siffli, like here in Paris."

The book closes on an unexpected and suggestive note. Antoine, who had
always realized that his grandfather couldn't bear his being "different"
in music, had taken quietly to composing the kind of things he loved. He
"made" a quintet in which Ribiera was given a brilliant piano part, and
which he thought beautiful--extremely. But when they played it for him,
though he was moved to cry, he found its "ideas" not so good as he had
thought. Whereupon he plans to produce better ones in his new overture.

_Succession_ is a masterpiece of art, and Antoine is the most lovable
and interesting character in new fiction.




                       The Meaning of Bergsonism


                            LLEWELLYN JONES

Bergson's philosophy is the antithesis of the natural-science view of
the universe as mechanism. In that view the laws of nature are fixed
sequences controlling matter, or energy, and the more complicated and
faultless the mechanism the higher the life. Just how this mechanism
became conscious of the fact that it was a mechanism--caught itself at
itself, so to speak, and announced the laws of its own being--is a
question as puzzling as the old theological one of the aseity of
God--which is simply a Latinized way of asking how the deity could,
being infinite, turn himself inside out in such a manner as to become
aware of his own existence and attributes. In fact, the two questions
are one and the same. According to Bergson, mechanism not only cannot
explain consciousness, but it is the very antithesis of conscious life.
Behind mechanism he places an inextinguishable but not uncheckable vital
urge with endless potentialities and with no fixed goal. The progress of
this "elan vital" is through resistance to matter, which is simply the
reversal of its own movement. The onward urge is what Bergson calls
"pure duration" or motion, and its collision with its own reverse
movement is what appears to us as space. The actual situation of life at
any given time is simply a _modus vivendi_ between this spiritual
activity striving to be free, and the reverse movement.

We know, of course, that the physical universe is simply energy running
down. Just as a glass of water cools off, so the sun dissipates its
heat, and so, we are learning, the elements break up into simpler forms,
giving off their contained energy in the forms of heat and electricity
as they do so. But on the other hand the plant takes unto itself that
energy of the sun, and with it builds up again the inorganic salts from
its soil into higher forms with a greater content of stored energy. What
the plant does, says Bergson, is typical and symbolical of what all life
does at all times: sets up a reverse current to the running-down
tendency of the universe of matter.

Life cannot do this easily, but has to adapt itself to the resistance of
the downward flow. It does this through its motor reactions, its sense
organs, and above all through its intelligence when that is evolved. The
evolution of these things gives us our ideas of space. The insect cuts
up its environment into spatial forms easy for it to deal with. Man with
different sense organs probably lives in a different space world. As "a
thing is where it acts," it is obvious that the boundaries of things in
the material realm would be quite different if we had, for example, some
sort of sense organ adapted to identify things by their electrical
properties. But this identifying of things by spatial and material
concepts--the mathematical order--is instrumental to the ends of action,
and the original consciousness of life, while it included the
potentialities of intellectual knowledge, was instinctive. Instinct,
according to Bergson, is first-hand knowledge, but knowledge incapable
of conceptual extension. It is therefore no use in the practical affairs
of life, but certain and immediate in its apprehension of the actual
flow of life itself. In its broadened form of intuition it is
responsible for all the valid and original insights of the philosophers
and poets. The structural and dialectic forms in which philosophies have
been given to the world are simply the intellectualizing process which
philosophers have used to buttress--and which they have often thought
produced--the insight which was prior to and independent of the system.

Bergson's doctrine has been seized upon by apologists for every creed
and for every iconoclasm. Bergson has been accused of every intellectual
crime, from being the intellectual father of syndicalism to being the
last rich relative of struggling obscurantism. The protestant
theologians talk glibly of Bergson's idea of God, and use him as a stick
with which to beat the hated materialist. Bergson himself would never
apply his philosophy to the uses of the syndicalists. The argument of
the syndicalists themselves is simply an ingenious parody of the
Bergsonian philosophy, as it is so far developed. As mechanism and the
mathematical order, they say, do not represent life, we cannot by the
means of natural and sociological sciences predict in advance what life
will do, and what forms it will take. We cannot base revolutionary
action, for instance, along Marxian lines, because the whole Marxist
philosophy rests upon the assumption that life is the slave of material
forces--chemical firstly, and economical in the human drama--and that it
will therefore follow along predetermined lines. If life is an "elan
vital," breaking its path as it goes, and only able to think in terms of
the past, then revolutionary activity must cut loose from the
reactionary intellect, and trust itself to its instincts; fight its way
to that freedom which is impossible in the mathematically determined
intellectual realm, and which is equally impossible of achievement by
mere intellectual foresight. So the syndicalist in the name of Bergson
cuts loose from all theories of the future he wishes to bring in,
preaches the "general strike" for its stimulating effect on the emotions
of the proletarian constituents of his social "elan vital"--quite
careless of whether it would ever be a practical success or not--and
deliberately cuts loose from all forms of "bourgeoise culture."

But the anti-revolutionists point out that Bergson does believe in the
intellect as a guide to the practical affairs of life; and industry and
production--the field of the syndicalist--are far more mechanical than
they are vital. In man's industrial relations he has to approximate
himself as much to the machine as possible, and for Bergson's
anti-intellectualism to be applied to this particular realm of life is
as great a calamity as could happen to the doctrine. And then these
conservatives proceed, less justifiably perhaps, to train the captured
gun of intuition upon the syndicalists. The racial intuitions, they say,
are older than the race's newly-found intellectual conceptions. For
generations the race has lived by certain instinctive rules of conduct.
Religion, custom, and patriotism, these are all sacred because they are
extra-intellectual, and they dare us to disturb these sacred things. It
is a strange sight--this most revolutionary philosophical doctrine being
used to support all the prejudices that the ages have handed down--but
we cannot deny that it is a plausible use of intuitionism, and a more
legitimate use than that to which Sorel and his followers have put the
teachings emanating from the College of France.

Perhaps the most detailed application that Bergson has yet made of his
philosophy to the affairs of life is his application of its principles
to the puzzling aesthetic problem of laughter and the comic. His theory
is that laughter is a social corrective directed against the man who
allows the dogging steps of mechanism to overtake him and imprison his
spirit in a web of meaningless action. The man who is walking along the
street should be going in a determinate direction with a determinate end
in view, and with the ability to get there in spite of reasonable
obstacles. So says society. When he becomes abstracted, walks
mechanically, and in consequence falls over a brick, we laugh at him. He
has permitted himself to become a machine for the nonce instead of a
self-conscious spirit, and society cannot afford to have its interests
jeopardized in that way.

_The International Journal of Ethics_ for January, 1914, contains an
article by J. W. Scott, who accuses Bergson of ethical pessimism on the
grounds of his view of the comic. He points out that the psychology of
comic action, as Bergson works it out, is precisely that of moral
action. For in moral action, too, a man does what is habitual, what is
against his own self-conscious impulse, what is mechanical in that it is
a fixed course of conduct pursued without reference to the favor or
disfavor of the environment. The life impulse must be, he convicts
Bergson of saying, adaptable to its circumstances; it must insert itself
between the determinisms of matter; it must pursue the crooked path
where the straight path is too difficult. It cannot follow its moral
ideal without making itself ridiculous, as indeed in real life moral
people are always doing.

This criticism hangs on the acceptance of a moral ideal, and if we must
have an ideal in the sense of a goal beckoning us from the future, then
the criticism is well founded and Bergson is an ethical pessimist. But
systematic ethics have been denied by other philosophers before Bergson,
and most people of modern temperament are quite willing to let the whole
question of _a priori_ ethics drop. They might not be willing to
exchange it for the very unpoetic utilitarianism which has so often been
offered in its place, but Bergson offers something more than that. If he
be an ethical pessimist, he is not a religious pessimist. Of religion he
has not yet spoken, except incidentally. Obviously so long as he uses
the scientific method in his philosophy, proceeding from facts to their
subordination in a picture whose values are given by intuitions, he
cannot present a systematic philosophy. But in spite of the fact that
pessimism--not only in ethics but in his view of the content of
personality and its relations with the universe--is charged against him,
Bergson means to be decidedly optimistic in his treatment of
personality. In his article in _The Hibbert Journal_ for October, 1911,
occur these remarkable words:

   If then, in every province, the triumph of life is expressed by
   creation, ought we not to think that the ultimate reason of human
   life is a creation which, in distinction from that of the artist
   or man of science, can be pursued at every moment and by all men
   alike? I mean the creation of self by self, the continual
   enrichment of personality by elements which it does not draw from
   outside but causes to spring forth from itself.... If we admit
   that with man consciousness has finally left the tunnel; that
   everywhere else consciousness has remained imprisoned; that every
   other species corresponds to the arrest of something which in man
   succeeded in overcoming resistance and in expanding almost
   freely, thus displaying itself in true personalities capable of
   remembering all and willing all and controlling their past and
   their future, we shall have no repugnance in admitting that in
   man, though perhaps in man alone, consciousness pursues its path
   beyond this earthly life.

On the other suppositions of Bergson's philosophy this is by no means so
far-fetched as are most theories of immortality. For the consciousness
which cuts out the patterns of our spatial life here could easily cut
out others in the beyond, like enough to our present ones to carry on
the continuity of our active existence. The idea of survival, or an idea
that may be applied to transmundane survival, is suggested by Laurence
Binyon in a recent volume of poems entitled "Auguries." He writes:

      And because in my heart is a flowing no hour can bind
      Because through the wrongs of the world looking forth and behind
      I find for my thoughts not a close, not an end,
      With you will I follow, nor crave the strength of the strong
      Nor a fortress of time to enshield me from storms that rend.
      This is life, this is home, to be poured as a stream as a song.

This is quoted not only because it represents the poetical realization
of Bergson's message, but because it points to one reason why the charge
of pessimism has been brought against Bergson even in this connection.

If only progress is our home, if there be no stability, how is that
permanence of values to be achieved which Hoeffding declares to be the
essential axiom of religion? We may love our faithful dog, but according
to Bergson it represents an evolutionary blind alley. We may create as
we will, but we shall survive our creations. Here, after all, is at the
best a tempered optimism. No reunions are promised in the Bergsonian
paradise. Only a perpetual streaming that does not, so far as Bergson
has yet told us (and that is an important point) ever wind safely home
to sea.




                       Instinct and Intelligence


   Clarence Darrow recently echoed that high estimate of instinct at
   the expense of intelligence which has been the fashion since
   Bergson. Some of these days, when that case has been overstated
   often enough, there will be a return swing of that pendulum. The
   instinctive wasp who, in order to paralyze it, knows how to sting
   a caterpillar "as though she knew its anatomy" may not always
   seem in all respects superior to the human surgeon who does
   actually know anatomy and can apply that knowledge in a thousand
   ways--versus the wasp's one. Some day it will strike some one
   that no creature has an instinct against poison comparable in
   delicacy, subtlety, and fullness with a chemist's noninstinctive,
   intelligent knowledge of poisons--and nonpoisons. So with a
   number of things. The pragmatic objection to our present
   glorification of instinct is that it tends to become a
   glorification of intellectual whim.--George Cram Cook in _The
   Chicago Evening Post_.




                        The Jewels of a Lapidary


     _Emerson's Journals_, Volume IX, 1856-1863. (Houghton Mifflin
                           Company, Boston.)

At least nine events of permanent historic interest have occurred in
American literature within the past few years: they are represented by
the publication of nine volumes of Emerson's _Journals_. Those who are
trying to achieve a personal religion, which acknowledges God as an
immanence instead of a proposition, hail with a quiet joy every
extraction from the great mine in which Emerson stored the jewels of his
life. If we do not recognize them as lapidarious we must perceive them
as the better metals of ourselves, for this "friend and aider of those
who would live in the spirit" inhumed those spiritual values which all
men at some time or another seek as their own. Emerson buoys us up for
our common struggles and makes us conscious of that aid which is the
awakening of latent power. He composed the bricks which thousands of
builders have used in fashioning beautiful personal temples. "I dot
evermore in my endless journal," he wrote to Carlyle; "... the
arrangement loiters long, and I get a brick-kiln instead of a house."
Speaking of his philosophical work he confesses a "formidable tendency
to the lapidary style," and adds, "I build my house of boulders."

Emerson's published journals are kilns and quarries from which the
foundation materials for the edifice of character have been obtained by
countless builders. If he could not construct a system of philosophy, as
Arnold alleges, he could and did provide the "boulders" and indicate the
pattern which others have used. He is a part of every well-read
American, and, chiefly through Carlyle, still lives in the land of his
forefathers. He was an inspiration to Whitman, one of whose "specimen
days" closed with "a long and blessed evening with Emerson." Such
evenings are as real now as in Whitman's time, and are more commonly
experienced, for Emerson is westward-bound. He has traveled slowly in
this direction: "boulders" are not carried by exploiters and pioneers
who build and live in a world not of "the spirit" but of the senses.
With the establishing of easier communication between centers of thought
and fields of action in America, New England "boulders" were brought
hither, to chink the crude walls of western life; and it is a token of
Emerson's vitality and spiritual universality that his "bricks" and
"boulders" are discoverable in all sorts of shacks which men are trying
to improve. Lumber decays, but "boulders" remain, and some of them
become talismanic.

In reading and re-reading Emerson's _Journals_ one is impressed with
their remarkable quotability, and in this mechanical handiness of his
work we have a partial explanation of the slowness with which it has
been assimilated. "Boulders" are fated to be knocked about before they
are appreciated. We throw them at one another with a sort of physical
dexterity until, burnished and transformed, they are recognized as
adapted to higher uses. We do not flippantly quote or mention the
authors who have become personal to us; I quote Emerson's _Journal_ as a
blessed soliloquy.

                                                              D. C. W.




                            New York Letter


                              GEORGE SOULE

The most interesting hours of the last week I have spent in listening to
discussions of the futurists. Someone told of a superb incident recently
reported of a speech by Marinetti, the enunciator of the futurist
philosophy. Marinetti, after denouncing the past in his usual method,
proceeded to eliminate women from his world. "But," said someone, "how
will you continue the human race?" "We will _not_ continue the human
race," rejoined Marinetti, with superb _eclat_. Daring and magnificent
utterance! But, after all, perhaps he is the only sane one, and the norm
of human intelligence quite insane. That fits in well with the recently
reported discovery of a Paris scientist, that all variations in the
course of evolution are the result of disease, and that there would have
been no man had not some ape had a parasite in his thyroid gland. All of
which goes to show that I was right in my statement (which Chesterton
probably has said before me) that all logical extremes are illogical,
since the world is based on an eternal paradox.

Really it is quite simple to follow the futurist line of thought once
you get the hang of it. For instance--two developments of painting
predicted at the Troubetzkoys. In the first, each plane in the cubist
picture, instead of being colored, is to be numbered, and the numbers
printed in a catalogue opposite the names of the colors for which they
stand. Thus any approach to the vulgar intrusion of realism would be
avoided, and abstract beauty furthered. What chances for the
imagination! And think of the subtle possibilities in the mathematics of
color! One could surely express by some abstruse quadratic a color quite
beyond the realm of visual possibility, and thus man by one gigantic tug
at his bootstraps would pull his soul out of its finite limitations.

The second school was aptly named the auto-symbolists. In this school
Nietzschean individualism attains its sublime extreme. The artist,
instead of expressing his spirit in the vulgar symbols understood by
everybody, arbitrarily chooses a symbol known only to himself. If he
wishes to depict a determined man going up a mountain on a mule's back
he may paint a mouse-trap. To him the mouse-trap perfectly expresses the
particular feeling he has when viewing his own mental image of the
picture he has decided to paint. What matter about anybody else? If you
ask him _cui bono_?--he will reply: why any _bono_ at all? And, of
course, he is perfectly logical. And the satisfying aristocratic
aloofness of his position! If people--as they surely will--study his
mouse-trap and discuss in vain what it portends, if they pay vast sums
for his pictures and start a literature of criticisms to guess his
unguessable riddles, so much the better. He can laugh at them with
diabolical glee. Everybody is a fool but himself, and he can go on
creating in the seventh circle of his own soul undisturbed by the
barnyard cackle of the world.

Has the cubist literature of Gertrude Stein awakened echoes in Chicago?
I have read it without understanding before this. But one night my
host--a great, strong, humorous, intelligent hulk of a man, himself a
scoffer at cubism--read part of her essay on Matisse so that it was
almost intelligible. His inflection and punctuation did it. Her chief
characteristics seem to be an aversion to personal pronouns and a strict
adherence to simple declarative statements, untroubled by subordinate
clauses or phrases of any kind. Her thought, therefore, resolves itself
awkwardly in a four-square way. The multiplicity of her planes becomes
confusing after a page, but each plane stands alone. Thus--(I quote
inaccurately)--"Some ones knew this one to be expressing something being
struggling. Some ones knew this one not to be expressing something being
struggling. This one expressed something being struggling. This one did
not express something being struggling." Which, of course, is the cubist
way of saying that "Some thought he was trying to express struggle in an
object, others thought the contrary. As a matter of fact, he sometimes
did express struggle; sometimes he did not."

But it seems her early work is now getting too obvious, so she is in the
throes of a later phase. In her "Portrait of Miss Dodge" she has
eliminated verbs and sentence structure entirely, flinging a succession
of image-nouns at the reader. One can surely not accuse her of
"prettiness."

The craze for colored wigs is, of course, an outgrowth of futurism. Why
should a man be any color except that which his will dictates? This has
long (a few months) been the cry of the painter, and the smart set has
echoed: Why should he? Women in green and blue wigs have been seen in
New York already. But, of course, it would be senseless to stop there;
if one has an orange toupe he should surely have a mauve face. Yellow
complexions are worn with indigo hair. We have long been accustomed to
blue powdered noses on Fifth Avenue, and the setting of diamonds in the
teeth is an old story. The only trouble with this epoch-making idea is
that it is old. Phoenician women did it! And wasn't it Edward Lear who
wrote of _The Jumblies_:

      "Their heads are green, and their hands are blue,
      And they went to sea in a sieve"?

Of course, if one doesn't believe in this new development of art, but is
naturalistic, he should be brave enough to chase his idea to its lair
and act upon it, like Lady Constance Stewart Richardson, who is now
tripping about the homes of the rich in New York with nothing at all
on--or worse than nothing.

Forgive my preposterosities! But the ridiculous seriousness with which
everything unfamiliar is taken by a sensation-sated _haute monde_ is
such a brilliant target for satire. I think with immense relief of a
wonderful bit of sky, and a long stretch of beach, and of all things
tangible and--yes, though it may be bourgeois--_healthy_.




                            To a Lost Friend


                            EUNICE TIETJENS

   Across the tide of years you come to me,
       You whom I knew so long ago.
   A poignant letter kept half carelessly,
   A faded likeness, dull and gray to see....
       And now I know.

                                . . . . . .

   Strange that I knew not then,--that when you stood
       In warm, sweet flesh beneath my hand,
   Your soul tumultuous as a spring-time flood
   And life's new wonder pulsing in your blood,
       I could not understand.

   I could not see your soul like thin red fire
       Flash downward to my gaze,
   Nor guess the strange, half-understood desire,
   The tumult and the question and the ire
       Of those far days.

   I saw your soul stretch longing arms to love
       In adolescent shyness bound,
   And passionately storm the gods above.
   Yet, since my own young heart knew naught thereof,
       You never found.

   It is too late now. You have dropped away
       In formless silence from my ken,
   And youth's high hopes turn backward to decay.
   Yet, oh, my heart were very fain to-day
       To love you then!

   Culture has one great passion--the passion for sweetness and
   light. It has one even yet greater!--the passion for making them
   _prevail_.--Matthew Arnold in _Culture and Anarchy_.




                    The Irish Players: An Impression


   A small, low room with walls of cool green-grey; in the center an
   old brown fire-place with a great black chimney; on the hearth a
   light like a deep raspberry; at each end a chair of smudgy brown;
   near the front a table toned with the walls; on it two black mugs
   and a stein; in one corner at the back, piled against the
   green-grey, flour sacks the color of dirty straw; and standing in
   the foreground, balanced as Whistler would have done it, a miller
   in a suit of brown, a thin widow in rusty black, a fat widow with
   bustles in rusty black and dirty white.--Somehow one planned
   beauty in that place.




                          The Novel of Manners


   ... And yet, even into Mrs. Wharton's work is creeping slowly a
   part of the tremendous socializing spirit of today--the
   realization that group backgrounds, unlighted by a sense of their
   relativity to other groups, and to life, do not amount to much
   more than painted scenery. Over in England, Wells, with all his
   tremendous burden of national background and customs, manages,
   often with a desperate wrenching of impedimenta, but always with
   a great resolve that commands admiration, to inject into his
   massive English settings a humanized world atmosphere as well.
   Wells writes not of Englishmen and England, but of Englishmen and
   the world. And Galsworthy, his soul permeated by this new social
   sense, writes down, in his English men and women, all humanity,
   with all the tragedy and plaintive joys of human life, with the
   desires and hampered fruition of the desires of all living
   things, as his background. Not the world alone, but life, is the
   stage.--Edna Kenton in _The Bookman_.

   A man should always obey the law with his body and always disobey
   it with his mind.--James Stephens in _The Crock of Gold_.

   There are two great rules of life, the one general and the other
   particular. The first is that everyone can, in the end, get what
   he wants if he only tries. This is the general rule. The
   particular rule is that every individual is, more or less, an
   exception to the general rule.--_The Note-Books of Samuel
   Butler._




                       Forbes-Robertson's Hamlet


   All my life I seem to have been asking my friends, those I loved
   best, those who valued the dearest, the kindest, the greatest,
   and the strongest, in our strange human life, to come with me and
   see Forbes-Robertson die in _Hamlet_. I asked them because, as
   that strange young dead king sat upon his throne, there was
   something, whatever it meant--death, life, immortality, what you
   will--of a surpassing loneliness, something transfiguring the
   poor passing moment of trivial, brutal murder into a beauty to
   which it was quite natural that that stern Northern warrior, with
   his winged helmet, should bend the knee. I would not exchange
   anything I have ever read or seen for Forbes-Robertson as he sits
   there so still and starlit upon the throne of Denmark.--Richard
   Le Gallienne in _The Century_.

   To feel, to do, to stride forward in elation, chanting a poem of
   triumphant life!--James Stephens in _The Crock of Gold_.

   Why is it that in some places there is such a feeling of life
   being all one; not merely a long picture-show for human eyes, but
   a single breathing, glowing, growing thing, of which we are no
   more important a part than the swallows and magpies, the foals
   and sheep in the meadows, the sycamores and ash trees and flowers
   in the fields, the rocks and little bright streams, or even than
   the long fleecy clouds and their soft-shouting drivers, the
   winds?--John Galsworthy in _The Atlantic Monthly_.




                   The Dying Pantheist to the Priest


   Henry A. Beers, the author of this dynamic poem from which we
   quote only a part, is a professor of literature at Yale--a man
   supposedly conventional and soft spoken!

   Take your ivory Christ away:
     No dying god shall have my knee,
   While live gods breathe in this wild wind
     And shout from yonder dashing sea.

   O no, the old gods are not dead:
     I think that they will never die;
   But I, who lie upon this bed
     In mortal anguish--what am I?

   A wave that rises with a breath
     Above the infinite watery plain,
   To foam and sparkle in the sun
     A moment ere it sink again.

   The eternal undulation runs:
     A man, I die; perchance to be,
   Next life, a white-throat on the wind,
     A daffodil on Tempe's lea.

   They lied who said that Pan was dead:
     Life was, life is, and life shall be.
   So take away your crucifix--
     The ever-living gods for me!

                                                  --_The Yale Review._




                  Interesting New or Forthcoming Books


   [Classification in this list implies a review in an early issue.]

_Notes of a Son and Brother_, by Henry James.

_Collected Essays of Rudolph Eucken._

_The Fugitive_, by John Galsworthy.

_Plays_, by Tchekoff and Andreyeff.

_Stories of Russian Life_, by Tchekoff.

_Selected Essays of Alice Meynell._

_Second Nights_, by Arthur Ruhl.

                                                           --Scribner.

_Stories of Red Hanrahan_, by William Butler Yeats.

_The Tragedy of Pompey_, by John Masefield.

_Chitra_, by Rabindranath Tagore.

_The Possessed_, by Dostoevsky.

_The Flight and Other Poems_, by George E. Woodberry.

                                                          --Macmillan.

_When Ghost Meets Ghost_, by William De Morgan.

_Nowadays_, by George Middleton.

_Angel Island_, by Inez Haynes Gillmore.

_Euripides and His Age_, by Gilbert Murray.

_Social Insurance_, by I. M. Rubinow.

                                                               --Holt.

_The World Set Free_, by H. G. Wells.

_The Way of All Flesh_, by Samuel Butler (new edition).

_Wagner as Man and Artist_, by Ernest Newman.

_The Philosophy of Ruskin_, by Andre Chevrillon.

                                                             --Dutton.

_Little Essays in Literature and Life_, by Richard Burton.

_Beaumont, the Dramatist_, by Charles M. Gayley.

_Arthur Rackham's Book of Pictures._

_Prostitution in Europe_, by Abraham Flexner.

                                                            --Century.

_The Poems of Francois Villon._

_Knave of Hearts_, by Arthur Symons.

_Essays of Francis Grierson_ (new editions).

_The Fortunate Youth_, by William J. Locke.

                                                               --Lane.

_The Making of an Englishman_, by W. L. George.

_The Truth About Women_, by C. Gasquoine Hartley.

                                                         --Dodd, Mead.

_Our Friend, John Burroughs_, by Clara Barrus.

_Paul Verlaine_, by Wilfred Thorley.

_The Japanese Empire_, by T. Philip Terry.

                                                   --Houghton Mifflin.

_Knowledge and Life_, by Rudolf Eucken.

_The Science of Happiness_, by Jean Finot.

                                                             --Putnam.

_Florian Mayr_, by Baron von Wolzogen.

_Socialism and Motherhood_, by John Spargo.

                                                            --Huebsch.

_Richard Wagner_, by Oliver Huckel.

_The Education of Karl Witte_, translated by Leo Wiener.

                                                            --Crowell.

_Crowds, Jr._, by Gerald Stanley Lee.

_A Thousand Years Ago_, by Percy MacKaye.

                                                          --Doubleday.

_The Masque of Saint Louis_, by Percy MacKaye.

                                                             --Stokes.

_Old Mole_, by Gilbert Cannan.

                                                           --Appleton.

_Poems_, by Brian Hooker.

                                                    --Yale University.

_The Clean Heart_, by M. A. Hutchinson.

                                                      --Little, Brown.




                       Some Scribner Spring Books


                       Notes of a Son and Brother

                             By HENRY JAMES

                _Illustrated, $2.50 net; postage extra_

   This is the continuation of the account, in "A Small Boy and
   Others," of the early years of William and Henry James and their
   brothers, with much about their father and their friends. The
   story of the life in Switzerland and Geneva, and later on in
   Newport and Cambridge, tells not only their own experiences but a
   great deal about such men as John LaFarge, Hunt, Professor
   Norton, Professor Childs, and Ralph Waldo Emerson, who was a
   close friend of Henry James, Senior. The description of the Civil
   War time and of Wilkinson James's experiences with Colonel Shaw's
   colored regiment are particularly interesting. The illustrations
   are from drawings made by William James in the early part of his
   career when he was studying to be a painter.

                              Shallow Soil

                             By KNUT HAMSUN

         _Translated from the Norwegian by Carl Chr. Hyllested.
                       $1.35 net; postage extra_

   Introduces to the English-speaking world a writer already a
   classic not only in his own country but throughout continental
   Europe.

   The publication of "Shallow Soil" is accordingly a literary event
   of the first magnitude in the sphere of fiction. Hamsun is the
   greatest living Scandinavian novelist and this work alone
   justifies his fame. It is a social picture of Christiania, and
   indeed of generally modern life.

                       A Village Romeo and Juliet

                          By GOTTFRIED KELLER

        _With a Biographical and Critical Introduction by Edith
           Wharton. Translated by A. C. Bahlmann, $1.00 net;
                             postage extra_

   This love story of Swiss peasant life--whose title conveys the
   character of its plot--is generally regarded as the finest and
   most representative production of the great Swiss novelist. But
   it has a still further element of interest beyond that which
   necessarily attaches to so fine a piece of writing--the
   singularly modern spirit which actuates the characters and
   inspires the writer.

                     Plays by Bjoernstjerne Bjoernson

         _Translated from the Norwegian, with Introductions, by
       Edwin Bjoerkman. Each with Frontispiece. $1.50 net; postage
                                 extra_


                             Second Series

      "Love and Geography"
      "Beyond Human Might"
      "Laboremus"

                     Plays by Bjoernstjerne Bjoernson


                             _First Series_

      "The New System"
      "The Gauntlet"
      "Beyond Our Power"

        _Translated from the Norwegian, with an Introduction, by
        Edwin Bjoerkman. Frontispiece. $1.50 net; by mail $1.65_

                             Second Nights

         By ARTHUR RUHL, author of "The Other Americans," etc.
                      _$1.50 net; by mail, $1.64_

   A perfectly charming chronicle of the chief features and phases
   of the metropolitan theater within the past few years. The point
   of view is wholly unprofessional, and the text, unweighted by the
   responsibilities of the first-night critic, is intimate and
   familiar.

                   The Fugitive: A Play in Four Acts

                           By JOHN GALSWORTHY

                     _60 cents net; postage extra_

   This is the tragic story of a woman who tries to escape from the
   bondage of social conventions. Clare, the heroine, strikes the
   key-note of the whole play when, in the last act, she says to the
   young man she has never seen before:

   "You see: I'm too fine, and not fine enough! My best friend said
   that. Too fine, and not fine enough. I couldn't be a saint and
   martyr, and I wouldn't be a soulless doll. Neither one thing nor
   the other--that's the tragedy."

   It has a deep significance when taken in connection with the
   feminist movement of today.

                       Mural Painting in America

                         By EDWIN H. BLASHFIELD

                _Illustrated, $2.00 net; postage extra_

   "The entire volume shows clearness of thought, careful analysis
   of the topics discussed, and a facility of expression that is
   seldom found in books written by men of action rather than words.
   Its perusal will repay any one of culture."

   --_The American Architect._

                        Charles Scribner's Sons
                         Fifth Avenue, New York




                       Two Important Biographies



                 Published by Houghton Mifflin Company

     _Two Americans, great in the world of politics and illustrious
         in their citizenship, have lately come into their full
        stature of fame through the lives of LYMAN TRUMBULL and
                          HARRISON GRAY OTIS._

   "THE LIFE OF LYMAN TRUMBULL" is the work of Horace White,
   ex-editor of the _New York Evening Post_. Whoever reads it will
   lay it down not merely with new knowledge concerning Lyman
   Trumbull but with a broader and surer grasp of the essential
   facts and philosophy of the war and the reconstruction period.
   Mr. White was an intimate friend of Trumbull, and it is evidence
   of his conscientious work that, in the preface, he admits that
   the careful study forced upon him by the composition of the book
   convinced him that his views upon one important point had been
   wrong from the beginning. Such open-mindedness could result only
   in what the book is--a fair and clean-cut presentation of the
   subject and, aside from its intrinsic interest, a valuable
   addition to American history and literature.

   HARRISON GRAY OTIS was a conscientious public servant, but so
   deep and instinctive was his devotion to Massachusetts that his
   loyalty to the national government was more than once seriously
   questioned. His biography disproves conclusively the accusation
   that he was ever concerned in any attempt to secede from the
   Union, and gives, for the first time, a full account of the
   famous Hartford convention, with illuminating paragraphs on the
   psychology of its leaders. The book is, in fact, an inside
   history of the Federalist party from 1796 to 1823. The author,
   Samuel Eliot Morison, is a descendant of Mr. Otis, and through
   his unusual opportunities of access to private correspondence has
   produced a work that is not only valuable as history, but
   fascinating in the gossip and personalities of the time.

              THE LIFE OF LYMAN TRUMBULL, by Horace White

                _Illustrated. $3.00 net. Postage extra_

       HARRISON GRAY OTIS; His Life and Correspondence, 1765-1848

            _Illustrated. 2 Vols. $6.00 net. Postage extra_

      Our Bulletins, issued several times each year, will be sent
                            FREE on request

              Houghton Mifflin Company, 4 Park St., Boston




                      The Novels of Ethel Sidgwick


   "Ethel Sidgwick is one of the half-dozen women writers who are
   contributing work of real value to modern English
   fiction."--_Sunday Times._

                                PROMISE

                      _$1.35 net, carriage extra_

   "She appears to us to possess that true imaginative gift, as
   distinguished from the mere power of vivid reporting, which is
   the necessary qualification for continuing to produce work of
   permanent value in fiction."--_Times._

   "For a first novel 'Promise' is exceptionally able--one that
   should have notable successors."--_Nation._

   "We are left to hope that the life of this English Jean
   Christophe will continue through at least another volume, filled
   with people as variegated and attractive as those to whom we are
   introduced in this."--_Spectator._

   "It is difficult to imagine anything being better in its kind
   than 'Promise.' It is the account of a human life from infancy up
   to the early beginning of a public career--one only wishes it
   were to be continued in another volume!"--_Chicago Evening Post._

                             LE GENTLEMAN:

                        An Idyll of the Quarter

                      _$1.25 net, carriage extra_

   "'Promise' was a work which lived up to its name. Its successor
   fulfills it."--_Morning Leader._

   "The scene of the final parting of Ferguson and Gilberte Morny is
   as fine as anything we know of in recent fiction. This is that
   most desirable thing--a novel that is different."--_New York
   Press._

                                HERSELF

                      _$1.35 net, carriage extra_

   "The hardly and ill-used word 'charm' must be given its original
   lustre for the sake of Miss Ethel Sidgwick's new novel 'Herself.'
   It has the power to bewitch and fascinate; odd smiles and warm
   tears lurk in it, and a melody played on the strings of the
   heart."--_Morning Post._

                               SUCCESSION

                     (A Continuation of "Promise")

                      _$1.50 net, carriage extra_

   "It places Miss Sidgwick unmistakably among the leading novelists
   of the day."--_Morning Post._

   "A novel that leaves one remembering a chain of scenes vividly
   impressed, and a good dozen of characters profoundly imagined and
   beautifully drawn."--_Manchester Guardian._

   "In the person of this young woman a new figure of unusually
   brilliant power has arisen in English fiction. She is the first
   woman novelist of the new period ... to accomplish the conquest
   of the American public and critics.... _Succession_ is indeed a
   tremendous piece of work. It is not only one of the big novels of
   the year, but a permanent contribution to English
   fiction."--_Boston Transcript._

              SMALL, MAYNARD & COMPANY, PUBLISHERS, BOSTON

                         STUDIES IN STAGECRAFT

                          By CLAYTON HAMILTON

   A book to increase the pleasure of the theatre lover and the
   skill of the playwright. By the author of "_The Theory of the
   Theatre_," already in its 4th impression. With full index. 12mo,
   $1.50 net; by mail, $1.62.

                            SOCIAL INSURANCE

             With Special Reference to American Conditions

                            By I. M. RUBINOW

   This book tells how social insurance is combating poverty in
   European countries and how these methods apply to American
   conditions. It deals with poverty due to sickness, old age,
   industrial accidents, unemployment, widowhood, or orphanage, with
   Employers' Liability Laws, Old Age Pensions, Pensions for Widows,
   etc. 8vo. 525 pp. $3.00 net; by mail, $3.20.

   "We had nothing approaching a spirited and authoritative
   treatment of social insurance until Dr. Rubinow published his
   important work."--_The Dial._

   "A thorough and clear exposition of a subject which has suddenly
   become of great importance in America."--_New York Times Book
   Review._




                      THE HOME UNIVERSITY LIBRARY


   Each volume complete and sold separately. Absolutely new books,
   no reprints.

                  Each 50 Cents Net. (By Mail 56 cts.)

      _Cloth bound, good paper, clear type, 256 pages per volume.
                      Bibliographies and indices._


                    SOME OF THE 77 VOLUMES NOW READY

                      _Complete list on request._

       Gilbert Murray's                     Euripedes and His Age
       G. K. Chesterton's             Victorian Age in Literature
       Jane Harrison's                     Ancient Art and Ritual
       H. A. L. Fisher's                                 Napoleon
       J. B. Bury's             History of the Freedom of Thought
       William R. Shepherd's                        Latin America
       W. T. Councilman's                  Disease and Its Causes
       C. M. Andrew's                         The Colonial Period
       William MacDonald's              From Jefferson to Lincoln
       F. L. Paxson's                               The Civil War
       A. F. Pollard's                     The History of England
       W. Warde Fowler's                                     Rome
       Benjamin Moore's                 Origin and Nature of Life
       Thomson and Gede's                               Evolution
       William MacDougall's                            Psychology
       R. R. Marett's                                Anthropology
       J. R. MacDonald's                                Socialism
       W. T. Brewster's                     Writing English Prose
       John Masefield's                               Shakespeare
       G. L. Strachey's            Landmarks in French Literature
       G. F. Moore's          The Literature of the Old Testament
       B. W. Bacon's              The Making of the New Testament
       Bertrand Russell's                  Problems of Philosophy

                          WILLIAM DE MORGAN'S

                         WHEN GHOST MEETS GHOST

                                                        _New Novel_

   A long, delightful romance in the measure and vein of "_Joseph
   Vance_." 62 pages. $1.60 net.

                         INEZ HAYNES GILLMORE'S

                              ANGEL ISLAND

                                                        _New Novel_

   A story of love, adventure and aspiration. By the author of
   "_Phoebe and Ernest_." Two illustrations by JOHN RAE. $1.35 net.

                         EUGENE MANLOVE RHODE'S

                          BRANSFORD IN ARCADIA

                                                        _New Novel_

   The story of a brave and humorous American of today in love and
   in deadly peril on our Mexican border, by the author of "_Good
   Men and True_." With frontispiece. $1.20 net.

                           CONINGSBY DAWSON'S

                        THE GARDEN WITHOUT WALLS

                                                    _Great Success_

   The romance of a Pagan-Puritan. "The literary surprise of the
   fall season." 7th printing. $1.35 net.

                        *HENRY HOLT AND COMPANY*
                      34 West 33d Street New York




                       FROM PUTNAM'S SPRING LIST


                             Francisco Goya

     A Study of the Work and Personality of the Eighteenth Century
                      Spanish Painter and Satirist

                             By HUGH STOKES

           _8^o. With 48 Full-page Illustrations. $3.75 net_

   Francisco Goya y Lucientes ranks with the great masters of modern
   painting. As a satirist he may be termed the Spanish Hogarth; his
   portraits recall the best period of the eighteenth century,
   whilst in his designs for tapestry he frankly emulated the light
   grace of the French craftsmen. Yet he could treat sterner
   subjects in a severer style. His large canvases, dealing in a
   realistic and dreadful fashion with the horrors of the French
   war, prove that he was artistically the precursor of Manet. His
   etchings are superb. Goya's life was as full of incident as that
   of Benvenuto Cellini. Although a Court painter he was a fervent
   Republican. At last, sick of Bourbon misrule, he fled to France,
   and died in Bordeaux, April 16, 1828, at the advanced age of
   eighty-two.

                        The Science of Happiness

                             By JEAN FINOT

                Author of "Problems of the Sexes," etc.

             Translated from the French by Mary J. Safford

                            _8^o. $1.75 net_

   The author considers the nature of happiness and the means of its
   attainment, as well as many allied questions.

   "Amid the noisy tumult of life, amid the dissonance that divides
   man from man," remarks M. Finot, "the Science of Happiness tries
   to discover the divine link which binds humanity to happiness
   through the soul and through the union of souls."

                           Knowledge and Life

                            By RUDOLF EUCKEN

          Author of "The Truth of Religion," "The Life of the
                             Spirit," etc.

                      _$1.59 net. By mail, $1.65_

   Professor Eucken's plea in this new volume of the Crown
   Theological Library is that the only knowledge which may be
   termed genuine springs from the demands and aspirations of man's
   own deepest life.

   The book forms an excellent epitome of the author's views
   concerning the need of a Metaphysic of Life.

                   One Generation of a Norfolk House

                 A Contribution to Elizabethan History

                       By AUGUSTUS JESSOPP, D.D.

            Author of "The Coming of the Friars," etc., etc.

         _Third Edition. Entirely Revised and Reset. $2.25 net_

   Dr. Jessopp has lent interest to everything he has written, and
   this study of his throws a welcome flood of light on a period
   which has been distorted alike by fanaticism and ignorance. It is
   a contribution to Elizabethan history of the first importance,
   particularly as a picture of the relation of the Jesuits to the
   political events of the time, and of the attitude of the
   government toward them. The author in elucidation of the merely
   personal narrative has introduced certain phases and aspects
   which have been neglected or ignored by other historians. The
   present edition has been revised with the aid of the author's
   memoranda made during the last thirty years.

                   The Sonnets of William Shakespeare

                       New Light and Old Evidence

                        By COUNTESS DE CHAMBRUM

        _12 Full-page Illustrations. $1.75 net. By mail, $1.90_

   This new edition of the Sonnets contains a readable as well as
   scholarly contribution to a most unsettled literary problem.
   There is new evidence solidifying some old theories, and there
   are ingenious suggestions opening up new vistas to the exploring
   mind.

                               Continuity

            Presidential Address to the British Association

                          By SIR OLIVER LODGE

                   Author of "Life and Matter," etc.

                      _$1.50 net. By mail, $1.65_

   The author contends against the tendency of the era apparent in
   the taking of refuge in vague forms of statement, the shrinking
   from close examination of the puzzling and obscure, and the
   denial of the existence of anything which makes no appeal to
   organs of sense--no ready response to laboratory experiment.

                           At All Booksellers
                    *G. P. PUTNAM'S SONS* Publishers
                            New York, London




                        APPLETON'S RECENT BOOKS


                           FORTY YEARS OF IT

                           By Brand Whitlock

          _Formerly Mayor of Toledo, Now Minister to Belgium_

   Mr. Whitlock's volume is in a sense a history of the progress of
   democracy in the Middle West. His reminiscences are of such men
   as Governor Altgeld, Tom Johnson, "Golden Rule" Jones. In the
   telling of these men, their ideas and ideals, and of himself as
   the continuator of their work, he illuminates that spirit which
   makes for democracy. Few reminiscences have had the vigor,
   optimism, and personal appeal of Mr. Whitlock's pages.

                   _Cloth, $1.50 net. Postage extra._

                        PSYCHOLOGY IN DAILY LIFE

                         By Carl Emil Seashore

       _Professor of Psychology and Dean of the Graduate College,
                          University of Iowa._

   A presentation of the general aspects of mental affairs which are
   involved in the regulation of practical interest. "A handbook for
   those who want to bring order out of mental chaos."--_Chicago
   Record-Herald._

                      _$1.50 net. Postage extra._

                           AUGUST STRINDBERG

                          By L. Lind-af-Hageby

   A thoughtful monograph combining a critical estimate with a
   sufficiently full and searching biography, the whole presenting a
   clear picture of this elusive author in his relation to modern
   thought.

              _With Portraits. $2.00 net. Postage extra._

                        PHILOSOPHY OF NIETZSCHE

                         By G. Chatterton-Hill

   The best and most readable exposition of the teachings of the
   philosopher that has yet been available for the general reader.

                      _$2.50 net. Postage extra._

                         HARRIET BEECHER STOWE

                          By Martha Foote Crow

   The wonderful woman whose history is described is seen in the
   home-making side of her life rather than in the more public and
   National phases.

               _Frontispiece. $1.25 net. Postage extra._

                            WOMAN IN SCIENCE

                         By H. J. Mozans, Ph.D.

   After outlining woman's capacity for scientific purposes, Dr.
   Mozans takes up step by step her achievements in all the
   departments of pure science from the earliest times to the
   present. A fountain of inspiration for those interested in the
   cause of women.

                      _$2.50 net. Postage extra._


                 _Recent Novels of Literary Importance_

      *OLD MOLE*, by GILBERT CANNAN, author of "Round the Corner."
      *YOUTH'S ENCOUNTER* (Sinister Street), by COMPTON MACKENZIE.
      *RICHARD FURLONG*, by E. TEMPLE THURSTON.

           _Complete descriptive circulars sent on request._

             D. APPLETON & CO., 35 W. 32d Street, New York




                      _Early Spring Publications_


                            DODD MEAD & CO.
              Fourth Avenue and Thirtieth Street, NEW YORK

                      The Making of an Englishman

                            By W. L. GEORGE

        Author of "A Bed of Roses," "Until the Day Break," etc.

   More clearly and cleverly than most books which attempt to do
   nothing else, Mr. George draws in this novel the contrasted
   characteristics of English and French. But this is in passing and
   a frame, as it were, to a story of people who are undeniably and
   indelibly real. Among the crowd of ephemeral novels of the season
   it stands out by reason of that quality which is as rare in
   novels as in people--a strongly marked individuality.

                              _$1.35 net._

                            A Pillar of Sand

                       By WILLIAM R. CASTLE, Jr.

                       Author of "The Green Vase"

   A novel which in a very clever way not only concerns itself with
   the doings of a group of people who are part of Boston society,
   but which delineates and holds up for the inspection of all
   Boston society. What is Boston society; what kind of people is it
   composed of; what are its characteristics; what does it amount to
   in this busy age?

                              _$1.30 net._

                           The Youngest World

                             By ROBERT DUNN

   Dr. Frederic Taber Cooper, the well-known reviewer for _The
   Bookman_, who read the advance sheets of Mr. Dunn's remarkable
   story of Alaska, "The Youngest World," says: "Plenty of authors
   have given us the physical suffering of the far north: the
   dropping away of the outer veneer of civilized man and the
   reappearance of the human animal, the brutishness and degradation
   brought about by cold and darkness and hunger. Mr. Dunn's book
   stands in a different class: there is no mistaking its absolute
   first-hand reflection of life--the life of strange, motley hordes
   of drifting outcasts and adventurers. But unlike the Jack London
   school, he never forgets that man is a little lower than the
   angels, as well as a little higher than the beasts; he never
   loses sight of the innate greatness of humanity, the greater
   spiritual as well as physical heights to which he may aspire....
   The book is good, big, significant, coming as it does in a season
   when the absolute dearth of vital fiction is painfully apparent."

                              _$1.40 net._

                    The Empress Frederick _A Memoir_

   An intimate biography of an Empress whose influence upon modern
   Europe has been very great, but of whom little has been written
   and little is known. Her son, the present Emperor of Germany, has
   been called "much more the son of his mother than of his father."

                              _$2.50 net._




                 The Only Book in Its Particular Field


                          The Book of the Epic

                            By H. A. GUERBER

       _With 16 Illustrations. 12mo. Cloth, $2.00 net. Postpaid,
                                 $2.12_

   "'The Book of the Epic' is a notable contribution to the history
   of racial poetry."--_Philadelphia Inquirer._

   "A valuable book which it is a pleasure to recommend. The stories
   of the most famous epics of all the nations are told briefly and
   illustrated by reproductions from the masters of painting. It is,
   in fact, the first book published which contains all the great
   epics in scenario. This is a book to own, for it is a rich source
   of knowledge which many readings will not exhaust."--_Pittsburgh
   Post._


                   _NOTEWORTHY JANUARY PUBLICATIONS_

                          The Careful Investor

         By EDWARD SHERWOOD MEAD, Ph.D., Professor of Finance,
          University of Pennsylvania. 12mo. Cloth. $1.50 net.
                            Postpaid $1.62.

   Professor Mead is well known for his articles on and
   investigations of financial conditions. In this book he presents
   the accepted opinions as to what constitutes a safe investment,
   and gives in condensed form a vast amount of data regarding the
   financial market.

                           The Lost Vocal Art

          By W. WARREN SHAW. Introduction by David Bispham. 20
      explanatory illustrations. 12mo. Cloth. $1.50 net. Postpaid
                                 $1.62.

   Mr. Shaw has written a work revolutionary in character, yet
   eminently logical, which should be in the hands of every teacher
   of voice culture and singer. His methods and principles have been
   endorsed by such great artists as Olive Fremstad, Johanna Gadski,
   Titta Ruffo, Florence Hinkle, and many more.

             Practical Cinematography and its Applications

         By F. A. TALBOT. With nearly 100 illustrations. 12mo.
                   Cloth. $1.00 net. Postpaid $1.12.

   This volume has been written with the purpose of assisting the
   amateur who is attracted towards the making of moving pictures.
   Set forth in a non-technical way it clearly points out the first
   principles of the art and the apparatus employed.

                           The Meaning of Art

                       Its Nature, Role and Value

   By Paul Gaultier, with a Preface by Emile Boutroux. Translated
   from the Third Edition by H. and E. Baldwin. With 36
   illustrations. 12mo. Cloth. $1.50 net.

   This work was crowned by the French Academy of Moral and
   Political Science. It is a remarkably entertaining and earnest
   exposition of art in its utmost complexity. Its appeal is to the
   feeling as well as to the understanding. Mr. Gaultier's work will
   delight all lovers of the fine arts and to many it will be the
   portal to a finer enjoyment of art, and a deeper knowledge of its
   Nature--Role--and Value!


                        _TWO NEW SPRING NOVELS_

   *DO YOU KNOW* that the greater part of the Crown Jewels of France
   disappeared from the Garde-Meuble during the Reign of Terror and
   never were recovered?

   *DO YOU KNOW* Tarrington, the fox-hunting town in Virginia, with
   an Alimony Row?

   *DO YOU KNOW* the blind Scotswoman's tale and the search which
   followed?


                       *IF YOU DON'T*, THEN READ

                            The Red Emerald

       By JOHN REED SCOTT, author of "The Unforgiving Offender,"
         etc. Three illustrations in color. $1.25 net. Postpaid
                                 $1.37.

   A romantic story of to-day with scenes laid in Washington and
   Virginia.

                              The Best Man

      By GRACE LIVINGSTON HILL LUTZ, author of "Marcia Schuyler,"
         etc. Illustrated in color. $1.25 net. Postpaid $1.37.

   Young and old enjoy Mrs. Lutz's charming and wholesome romances.
   They are recommended and endorsed by ministers, Sunday school
   superintendents, and they are fast taking a deserved place among
   the best and most desirable light fiction of our day. "The Best
   Man" is the story of a secret service employee on a dangerous
   mission, whom love overtakes in a most extraordinary manner. The
   climax of his peculiar and thrilling adventures comes only after
   many lively and humorous scenes.

                       *J. B. LIPPINCOTT COMPANY*
                        PUBLISHERS PHILADELPHIA




                Books of Timely Interest and Importance


                           THE WALLET OF TIME

                             WILLIAM WINTER

        Personal, Biographical, and Critical Reminiscence of The
                      American Theatre, 1791-1912

       _Two volumes, boxed. Price, $10.00 net._ A special edition
         limited to 1,250 copies. Beautifully illustrated, with
      engraved frontispiece to each volume, and over 70 half-tone
                              engravings.

   In many respects Mr. Winter's most interesting and important
   book, containing the personal as well as professional history of
   many of America's greatest actors. It abounds in personal
   recollections and theatrical history. Managers and actors, plays
   and dramatists are discussed. The book is full of masterly
   criticism and analyses. Of interest to all theatre-lovers, and
   indispensable for libraries.

                             SOCIAL SANITY

                             SCOTT NEARING

   This able and timely book by Professor Nearing, well-known for
   his writings on sociological and economic questions, treats of
   certain influences and problems of the greatest importance to our
   present-day civilization. The book is popular and not technical
   in its treatment.

   "... is an extremely timely and interesting volume dealing with
   the problems now confronting the American people."--_Boston
   Globe._

   "An earnest discussion of important influences and
   problems."--_St. Louis Post-Dispatch._

   "The author's outlook is everywhere sane and hopeful and
   stimulating to a degree."--_Chicago Record-Herald._

                              _$1.25 net._

                                VESTIGIA

                         ALGERNON SYDNEY LOGAN

                      A VOLUME OF COLLECTED POEMS

   These poems are marked by real beauty of thought and singular
   felicity of phrase and fancy. They are "footsteps"--glimpses, as
   it were, of the poet's mental state at various stages of his life
   journey. They are grave and gay--and through them all runs a
   bright and hopeful philosophy.

                              _$1.00 net._

                         SOCIAL ENTERTAINMENTS

                           LILLIAN PASCAL DAY

   A most attractive and useful book--filled with ingenious and
   clever suggestions for unique home entertainments. Parties for
   special occasions and anniversaries are described in detail and
   they are most cleverly planned. There are special entertainments
   for national holidays, different seasons and fetes, and none of
   them entail great expense.

          _Illustrated from original photographs. $1.25 net._

                        How to Appreciate Prints

                           FRANK WEITENKAMPF

                      A NEW AND UP-TO-DATE EDITION

   Since its first publication several years ago this admirable and
   authoritative book has had five printings. The publishers are
   pleased to announce this new edition, revised and edited anew by
   its author, the Custodian of Prints in the New York Public
   Library.

                       _Illustrated. $1.50 net._

                             FATHER LACOMBE

                            KATHERINE HUGHES

   A popular priced edition of Miss Hughes's Romantic Biography of
   the White Robed Voyageur. Of especial and timely interest owing
   to Father Lacombe's lifelong friendship with the late Lord
   Strathcona, and of this friendship the book makes intimate and
   detailed mention.

              _Illustrated, with Frontispiece. $1.50 net._

                    MOFFAT, YARD & COMPANY, NEW YORK




                         CROWELL'S SPRING BOOKS


                  Adventures of The Infallible Godahl

                      By FREDERICK IRVING ANDERSON

   These fascinating chapters from the career of a character even
   more ingenious in conception than the famous Raffles have made a
   great sensation during their publication in serial form. Not only
   are they well worth reading for their interest-compelling plots,
   but they gain an added value from the exceptional merit of the
   author's literary style. Mr. Anderson has developed a vein of
   fiction that well-nigh outclasses the work of both Hornung and
   Conan Doyle.

          _8 illustrations. 12mo. $1.00 net. By mail, $1.10._

                         THE COMMUTER'S GARDEN

                        Edited by W. B. HAYWARD

   A book for those who possess small plots of land and want advice
   on how best to improve and beautify them. Full of valuable
   information. 16 illustrations from photographs.

                   _12mo. $1.00 net. By mail, $1.10._

             TUBERCULOSIS: Its Cause, Cure, and Prevention

                        By EDWARD O. OTIS, M.D.

   The simple facts about this dread disease presented in a form
   interesting and intelligible to the layman. Dr. Otis is an
   authority on the "Great White Plague." 16 illustrations from
   photographs.

                   _12mo. $1.25 net. By mail, $1.37._

                  RICHARD WAGNER: The Man and His Work

                            By OLIVER HUCKEL

   A sympathetic study of the great composer, from a fresh
   viewpoint. Issued in style uniform with Dr. Huckel's well-known
   translations of the Wagner Operas. Illustrated.

       _Cloth, 75 cents net. Limp leather, $1.25 net. Postage, 8
                                cents._

                              HOW TO REST

                            By GRACE DAWSON

   Points out in a practical way the right method of living. Brief
   and to the point, and filled with sensible advice.

                _12mo. 50 cents net. By mail, 55 cents._

                       THE MESSAGE OF NEW THOUGHT

                         By ABEL LEIGHTON ALLEN

   A clear exposition of the basic ideas of New Thought and
   comparison of its teachings with those of the orthodox religions
   and Christian Science.

                   _12mo. $1.25 net. By mail, $1.37._

                  THE DEAF: Their Position in Society

                             By HARRY BEST

   The results of a thoroughgoing, scientific study of the deaf and
   so-called "deaf and dumb" in the United States. An authoritative
   contribution to the literature of a vitally important subject.
   (In Crowell's Library of Economics.)

                   _8vo. $2.00 net. By mail, $2.20._

            HEROES OF THE FARTHEST NORTH AND FARTHEST SOUTH

                            By J. K. MACLEAN

   Stirring accounts of leaders in Polar exploration, including
   Franklin, Kane, Greely, Nansen, Peary, Shackleton, and Captain
   Scott. Illustrated.

                _12mo. 50 cents net. By mail, 55 cents._

                           ROGET'S THESAURUS

                       Revised by C. O. S. MAWSON

   New large-type, thin-paper edition of this indispensable aid to
   students and literary workers. Revised and greatly enlarged.

   _Cloth, $1.50 net. Limp leather, $2.50 net. Postage, 15 cents._

                      The Education of Karl Witte

     Translated by Professor LEO WIENER and edited by H. ADDINGTON
                                 BRUCE

   The first edition in English of the remarkable story of the early
   training of the German boy who at fourteen took his degree of
   Ph.D., and at sixteen was made a Doctor of Laws and appointed to
   the teaching staff of the University of Berlin! An important book
   for parents and educators.

                   _8vo. $1.50 net. By mail, $1.65._

                  THOMAS Y. CROWELL COMPANY, New York




                    _New Books of Distinctive Merit_


                        Women As World Builders

                             By Floyd Dell

   This remarkable, timely book is attracting widespread notice. It
   tells what the feminist movement actually is, what the women of
   today want and how they are attempting to attain it. Every phase
   of woman's work and aspiration is considered with sympathy and
   understanding, free from any partisan spirit.

   Norman Hapgood, in "Harper's Weekly," says: An extremely good
   book. Floyd Dell is one of the few men who seem really to
   understand what the feminist movement is. Most books on the
   feminist movement are dull. Mr. Dell's is very readable.

   An exhilarating book, truly young with the strength and daring of
   youth, and as heartening to the women actors in this new, vivid
   drama of unknown documents as the applause of many hands in a
   darkened theatre.--_Chicago Tribune._

                             Price, 50 cts.

                         The Man And The Woman

                          By Arthur L. Salmon

   A delightful book that wins the heart and the mind of the reader
   with its charming treatment of love and friendship. The true
   relationship of men and women is considered in a sane, healthful
   spirit free from sentimentality.

   A new volume by Arthur L. Salmon is an event upon which those who
   like to keep in touch with thought and beauty may well
   congratulate themselves.--_London Daily Telegraph._

   Sane, fine and sweet in its spirit and noble in its ideals.--_New
   York Times._

                             Price, 75 cts.

                          The Back Yard Farmer

                          By J. Willard Bolte

   The seventy-five chapters of this useful book give complete and
   reliable directions for the best cultivation of vegetables, fruit
   and flowers, the management of poultry and pets, the proper care
   of the lawn, vines and shade trees, and discuss everything
   pertaining to the outdoors of the suburban, village or country
   home.

                              Price, $1.00

          _For sale wherever books are sold or supplied by the
                              publishers_

         *Forbes & Company*, 443 S. Dearborn Street, *Chicago*

                 The Meaning of God in Human Experience

                    By WILLIAM ERNEST HOCKING, Ph.D.

   _The profound impression which THE MEANING OF GOD IN HUMAN
   EXPERIENCE, by W. E. Hocking, continues to make encourages its
   publishers to bring it to the attention of readers of this
   journal with the firm conviction that in doing so they are
   rendering thoughtful students of religion and life no slight
   service._

   "These words also convey something of the sustained and
   convincing eloquence of thought--not enthusiastic, but simply
   vast and strong and careless, because sure."

                              --J. W. Scott in The Hibbert Journal.

   "A vital, logical presentation of the human conception and
   interpretation of God in present and past experience and of the
   foundations of religion. The author discusses with originality of
   thought the important trends of philosophy, pragmatic, realistic,
   idealistic and mystical, now touching religion, yet his
   conclusions are definite and constructive. Will interest students
   of philosophy and religion. Excellent index."

                           --American Library Association Booklist.

   "Every page bears evidence of years of patient study and thought,
   and every chapter brings one face to face with some of the great
   problems of psychology, philosophy or theology.... The student of
   the psychology of religion will find much of value in these
   sections. But the book is meant not for the psychologist chiefly,
   but for the human being, in a large sense, who is reflecting
   seriously over the problems of nature and destiny."

                                                      --The Nation.

                         (Circular on request.)

         _Crown 8vo. Cloth binding. Gilt top. 586 pages. Index.
                   Price $3.00 net; carriage extra._

                            New Haven, Conn.
                        *Yale University Press*
                     225 Fifth Ave., New York City

                THE DRAMATIC WORKS OF GERHART HAUPTMANN

    Four volumes of this edition, epoch-making in dramatic
   literature, authorized by Hauptmann, and published with his
   co-operation, are ready. The set will consist of six or more
   volumes. The editor, Professor Ludwig Lewisohn, supplies an
   introduction to each.


                                VOLUME I

      BEFORE DAWN
      THE WEAVERS
      THE BEAVER COAT
      THE CONFLAGRATION


                               VOLUME II

      DRAYMAN HENSCHEL
      ROSE BERND
      THE RATS


                               VOLUME III

      THE RECONCILIATION
      LONELY LIVES
      COLLEAGUE CRAMPTON
      MICHAEL KRAMER


                               VOLUME IV

      HANNELE
      THE SUNKEN BELL
      HENRY OF AUE

     _At all bookstores. Each, 12mo., cloth, $1.50 net; each weighs
                           about 24 ounces._

          B. W. HUEBSCH, Publisher, 225 Fifth Avenue, New York




                              NEW BOOKS OF
                            PERMANENT VALUE


                             ORIENTAL RUGS

        By WALTER A. HAWLEY. With 11 Color Plates, 80 Half-Tone
          Engravings, including 4 Maps. 4to. Cloth. $7.50 net.

   "The book is of especial importance to American readers because
   of its reference to the carpets on exhibition in the Metropolitan
   Museum of Art, New York City.... For the student of art the book
   is of real value also."--_The Outlook._

   "Covers familiar ground, but with more thoroughness than any
   previous English work on the subject.... As a working treatise
   for collectors and rug-buyers generally, it seems to us the best
   now in the field."--_New York Evening Post._

                   ROBERT FULTON: ENGINEER AND ARTIST

      His life and work. By H. W. DICKINSON, A. M. I., Mech. E. 31
                 Illustrations. Cloth. 8vo. $3.00 net.

   "Mr. Dickinson has performed a useful task with distinction,
   striking a nice balance between the usual human element and the
   special scientific element of his subject's career. In
   workmanlike fashion he presents a portrait fair and true of
   Robert Fulton as a man, as an artist and as an inventor."--_New
   York Evening Sun._

          ANTHONY TROLLOPE: His Work, Associates and Originals

             By T. H. ESCOTT. Illustrated. 8vo. $3.50 net.

   "Mr. Escott has so arranged Trollope's qualities and his defects
   as to summon a life-like figure from the vast mass of his written
   words. The frontispiece of the volume is a portrait which is
   almost a biography in itself."--_The Living Age._

   "A biography that has charm and interest.... This book was needed
   and Mr. Escott has executed his task in a manner that insures him
   the gratitude of his readers."--_New York Times._

                           THE SOUL OF PARIS

          By VERNER Z. REED. Colored Frontispiece and 8 other
        Illustrations by Ernest C. Peixotto. Large 12mo. Cloth.
                          Gilt top. $2.50 net.

   "Mr. Reed's essays are charming in their spirit of repose and
   fulness of life as he sees it."--_Boston Transcript._

                     THE WORKS OF FRANCIS GRIERSON

   "Mr. Grierson has a right to speak; he succeeds in one of the
   most difficult forms of literature, the essay."--_The Spectator._

   "You have deliciously and profoundly surprised me--you have said
   so many things which I should like to have written
   myself."--_Maurice Maeterlinck._

     *THE INVINCIBLE ALLIANCE*                         *$1.50* net
     *THE CELTIC TEMPERAMENT*                          *$1.00* net
     *MODERN MYSTICISM* (New Edition)                  *$1.25* net
     *PARISIAN PORTRAITS*                              *$1.00* net
     *THE HUMOUR OF THE UNDERMAN*                      *$1.00* net
     *LA VIE ET LES HOMMES* (In French)                *$1.00* net
     *THE VALLEY OF SHADOWS.*
       With 13 illustrations in colour by EVELYN PAUL  *$1.50* net

                      JOHN LANE COMPANY, NEW YORK

                         The COLOUR of the EAST

                         By ELIZABETH WASHBURN

   _Here is the essence of the East pictured with all the instinct
   of a painter--pulsing colour, a sense of vivid life, elimination
   of non-essential detail. To quote from the book_:

   "There are colours everywhere and always--in the dawns and
   sunsets, in the white moonlights and in the seas that drink in
   all the colour of the swimming skies. All day the native life
   pads along the roads without a sound. It meets, mixes in groups
   and separates--splashes of red in turbans, flowing muslins,
   scarfs of green and saffron and burnished naked skins."

        _With Frontispiece by Jules Guerin. $1.25 net; postpaid,
                                $1.37._

                            WHISPERING DUST

                           By ELDRID REYNOLDS

   _Frederic Taber Cooper writes in his introduction to this novel_:

   "There can be no half measures in any reader's attitude toward
   this book; it will either leave you cold, speaking to you in an
   unknown tongue, or else you will hail it with delight, as one of
   those rare and delicious discoveries, to be lingered over and
   reverted to, again and again, with ever new and infinite
   appreciation."

   It is the story of a woman over 30 who is having her first taste
   of travel and pleasure.

                     _$1.10 net; postpaid, $1.22._

                            THE TWO AMERICAS

                          By GEN. RAFAEL REYES

   Probably the most authoritative and informing book yet published
   on the Latin-American republics. General Reyes, ex-President of
   Colombia and well known as a statesman, diplomat and explorer,
   relates his thrilling experiences in early exploration; presents
   many sidelights on the history of the republics and sets forth in
   a highly interesting manner the conditions in the more important
   of these countries with the opportunities they offer to American
   enterprise and commerce. A book of vital importance to the
   business man, as well as to every one who is interested in the
   great continent of the future. Fully illustrated from
   photographs.

                _Cloth, 8vo; net $2.50; postpaid $2.70._

           Publishers: FREDERICK A. STOKES COMPANY, New York

            NIETZSCHE _and other_ Exponents of Individualism

                            _by_ PAUL CARUS

                       Illustrated. Cloth, $1.25

   "Of books on Nietzsche, we doubt whether any will be found more
   simple in its analysis and interpretation of the writings of 'The
   mad philosopher' than the present work."--_Pittsburgh Journal._

   "A two-fold purpose is served by this book--a study of
   philosophical anarchism and an interpretation of the theories of
   Nietzsche."--_Brooklyn Eagle._

   "A brilliant refutation of the mad philosopher's
   doctrine."--_Toronto Globe._

   "This exposition of Nietzsche's life and philosophy is probably
   both truthful and fair and as nearly just as any that can be
   made."--_Chicago Daily News._

   "The book is so incisive and clear that it may be taken as an
   introduction to the study of philosophy."--_Trenton Times._

   "Nietzsche, to the average man, has been little more than a
   name--a sort of synonym for turbulence--and violence of a nature
   not clearly understood. To such, this book will be welcome. It
   gives enough of both sides of the question of individualism to
   enable the reader to judge intelligently the principle of the
   'Overman'."--_Greensboro Daily News._

                               NIETZSCHE

   "The appearance of a philosopher like Nietzsche is a symptom of
   the times. He is one representative among several others of an
   anti-scientific tendency. The author here characterizes him as a
   poet rather than a thinker, as a leader and an exponent of
   certain unruly and immature minds. Though his philosophy is
   severely criticised, though it is weighed and found wanting, his
   personality is described not without sympathy and with an
   appreciation of his genius. His predecessor, Max Stirner, and
   other kindred spirits less known than Nietzsche are also
   introduced, and if the reader adopts the author's views he will
   condemn the tendencies and thoughts of these erratic philosophers
   but at the same time appreciate their aspirations and love them
   in their very errors. The fundamental error of them all is an
   extreme individualism which regards every single person as an
   absolute autonomous sovereign being, while a consideration of the
   origin of personality proves them to have originated within and
   under the influence of the social surroundings of communities
   from which they cannot be separated and of which they are and
   will forever remain parts. In this relation of the individual to
   society lie the roots of ethics. The individual cannot cut
   himself loose from his social surroundings without doing harm to
   himself; and the rules which this interrelation imposes upon the
   several members of society constitute an obligation which we call
   duty."

                         _Established in 1887_

                   The Open Court Publishing Company
                    Scientific and Educational Books
                   122 South Michigan Avenue, CHICAGO




                          IMPORTANT NEW BOOKS


                        THE SOUTH AMERICAN TOUR

                            By Annie S. Peck

             _Author of_ "A Search for the Apex of America"

   _With 87 illustrations mainly from photographs by the author._

   This is the first guide to THE SOUTH AMERICAN TOUR which is
   adequate and up-to-date in its treatment, dealing importantly
   with the subject both in its commercial and pleasure aspects.

                           *_8vo. Net $2.50_*

                          A BOOKMAN'S LETTERS

                By Sir W. Robertson Nicoll, M.A., LL.D.

   These papers here collected, forty-eight in all, deal with
   various literary personalities, problems and impressions and show
   Sir William Nicoll in his most genial and leisured spirit.

                         *_Octavo. Net $1.75_*

                ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON'S EDINBURGH DAYS

                         By E. Blantyre Simpson

   The hitherto untold record of the boyhood days of Stevenson--the
   most valuable recent contribution to Stevensoniana.

                *_Fully illustrated. Octavo. Net $2.00_*

                             MADAME ROYALE

                            By Ernest Daudet

           Translated from the French by Mrs. Rodolph Stawell

   The story of Madame Royale, daughter of Louis XVI and Marie
   Antoinette, covers the French Revolution, the tragic execution of
   her parents, and the mystery of the lost Dauphin. Ernest Daudet
   tells this story in a form which reads like
   fiction--impressionistic, racy--but is no less truth.

                   *_Illustrated. Octavo. Net $3.50_*

                         MY FATHER: W. T. Stead

                          By Estelle W. Stead

      The Record of the Personal and Spiritual Experience of W. T.
                                 STEAD.

   An extraordinary light cast on the life of the great journalist
   who ordered his life on direct messages from another world.

                         *_Octavo. Net $2.50_*

                             THINKING BLACK

                       By Dan Crawford, F.R.G.S.

                  _With many illustrations and maps._

     Twenty-two Years Without a Break in the Long Grass of Central
                                Africa.

   A brilliant and original book which will take its place among the
   Classics of the Missions. What Paton did for the New Hebrides,
   Cary for India, and Mackey for Uganda, Crawford has done for
   Central Africa.

                         *_Octavo. Net $2.00_*

                  THE NEW TESTAMENT: A New Translation

                    By James Moffatt, D.D., D.Litt.

   Dr. Moffatt is one of the most distinguished living scholars of
   the Greek New Testament. He is also a profound student of modern
   literature. He has re-translated with the view of giving a modern
   literary version which shall be verbally accurate in its
   equivalents for the Greek phrases. It is a work which awakens
   enthusiasm by its distinguished choice of language and which
   stirs up thought by its originality of rendering.

                      *_Small Quarto. Net $1.50_*


                               _FICTION_

                          EAST OF THE SHADOWS

                         By Mrs. Hubert Barclay

               _Author of "A Dream of Blue Roses," etc._

   One of the most original love stories that ever was
   penned--narrating a woman's power to restore romance.

                          *_12mo. Net $1.25_*

                          THE HOUR OF CONFLICT

                           By Hamilton Gibbs

   The story of a man who achieved the extraordinary through
   remorseful recollection of early wrong-doing.

                          *_12mo. Net $1.25_*

                               GILLESPIE

                          By J. Macdougall Hay

   A strong, daring, original piece of work, which exhibits that
   rare but unmistakable quality of permanency.

                          *_12mo. Net $1.40_*

                          A DOUBTFUL CHARACTER

                        By Mrs. Baillie-Reynolds

   An enigmatic love-story by the author of "Out of the Night," "A
   Make-Shift Marriage," etc.

                          *_12mo. Net $1.25_*

                          ANOTHER MAN'S SHOES

                           _A Mystery Novel_

                           By Victor Bridges

   Many a man leads a double life--this man lived the life of a
   double in a desperate attempt to cheat destiny.

                          *_12mo. Net $1.25_*

                               FORTITUDE

                            By Hugh Walpole

   The novel that places Hugh Walpole in the front rank of novelists
   to-day. A story of inspiring courage.

                          *_12mo. Net $1.40_*

                            JEAN AND LOUISE

                          By Antonin Dusserre

        _From the French by John M. Raphael with pen portrait of
       the author by Marguerite Audoux, author of "Marie Claire"_

   The chief claim of this novel is its entire difference from all
   other novels. It discovers a new territory and exploring it with
   beauty and tenderness, makes it appeal in the delicacy and
   sweetness of its atmosphere and character portraiture.

                          *_12mo. Net $1.20_*

                             DOWN AMONG MEN

                       By Will Levington Comfort

                  _Author of "Routledge Rides Alone"_

   The high-tide of Mr. Comfort's art--bigger than his previous
   novels.

                          *_12mo. Net $1.25_*

                           THE STORY OF LOUIE

                            By Oliver Onions

   The story of Louie, an experimenter in Life, triumphantly
   completes Oliver Onions' remarkable trilogy begun in "In
   Accordance With the Evidence" and carried through "The Debit
   Account."

                          *_12mo. Net $1.25_*

                          _AT ALL BOOKSELLERS_

                   GEORGE H. DORAN COMPANY, New York
              Publishers in America for HODDER & STOUGHTON




                       The Book Hit of the Year!


          _Over 75,000 Copies Sold in Advance of Publication._

   This prize winning novel is justifying the verdict of the judges
   (Miss Ida M. Tarbell and Mr. S. S. McClure) in awarding it first
   prize in competition with more than 500 manuscripts. It stands
   out pre-eminently as the book hit of the year and is receiving a
   cordial reception from book lovers everywhere.

                         Diane of the Green Van

                          _by Leona Dalrymple_

                  The Novel That Won The $10,000 Prize

   If you delight in a well written romance that will hold your
   interest from start to finish, by all means buy a copy of this
   fascinating novel.


                  A Breezy Story--Entertainingly Told

   It is not a "problem" or "sex" novel; it does not deal with woman
   suffrage; it does not argue. Diane of the Green Van is frankly a
   story for entertainment. Most of the scenes are laid in the big
   out-of-doors; it fairly breathes the spirit of the open. It is
   swift in movement, full of constant surprises, unusual
   situations, bright and witty in dialogue; through it all runs an
   absorbing romance deftly woven. Diane of the Green Van is
   wholesome and clean--with stirring action and striking drama.
   It's a big fine story!

        Standard novel size; 440 pages. Handsome cloth binding,
     stamped in gold; characteristic jacket printed in four colors;
        delightful illustrations in colortone by REGINALD BIRCH.

                    At All Dealers--Price $1.35 Net

                 Publishers *Reilly & Britton* Chicago




                          Transcriber's Notes


Advertisements were collected at the end of the text.

The original spelling was mostly preserved. A few obvious typographical
errors were silently corrected. Further corrections are listed here
(before/after):

   [p. 28]:
   ... and intimate 'co-operation between her ...
   ... an intimate 'co-operation between her ...

   [p. 31]:
   ... healthy!" Of course there is a number ...
   ... healthy!" Of course there are a number ...

   [p. 32]:
   ... definite heaven. It is impossible to imaging ...
   ... definite heaven. It is impossible to imagine ...

   [p. 34]:
   ... (and there seems to be a lot of them) can ...
   ... (and there seem to be a lot of them) can ...






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Little Review, March 1914 (Vol. 1,
No. 1), by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LITTLE REVIEW, MARCH ***

***** This file should be named 60402.txt or 60402.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/6/0/4/0/60402/

Produced by Jens Sadowski and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net. This book was
produced from images made available by the Modernist Journal
Project, Brown and Tulsa Universities,
http://www.modjourn.org.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

